{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Verdana;}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Isaiah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 The Book of the Prophet Isaiah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Prophecies Concerning Judah and Israel

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Jerusalem: Her Present Sin and Punishment; Her Future Redemption and Glory
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 1}The vision of Judah and Jerusalem, as seen by Isaiah the son of Amoz, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Lament over the Unfaithfulness of the People to their God

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Hear, you heavens, and give ear, O earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} Himself is the Speaker.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Sons have I reared and brought up,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but rebellious to Me are they grown.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}An ox knows its owner,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and an ass its master\uc1\u8217*s crib;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but Israel does not know,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my people do not consider.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Ah! sinful nation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you people laden with guilt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you brood of evil-doers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you children all corrupt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that have forsaken the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spurned the Holy One of Israel:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Why would you court more stripes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by straying yet further from Him?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The head is sick altogether,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the heart is all diseased.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}From the sole of the foot to the head
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there is no soundness therein:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Nought but bruises and weals
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wounds that are raw and bleeding,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all unpressed and unbandaged,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all unsoftened with oil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Your land is a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your cities are burned with fire;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the fields before your eyes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are being devoured by aliens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}And the daughter of Zion is left
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all alone like a booth in a vineyard,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a lodge in a cucumber-field,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or a turret where men keep watch.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Were it not that the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
had left us a remnant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
our fate has been wellnigh like Sodom\uc1\u8217*s,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or like to Gomorrah\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Futility of a Merely Ceremonial Worship

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Give ear to the word of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you rulers of Sodom;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and hear what our God has to teach you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you folk of Gomorrah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} says, \uc1\u8216*What care I
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
For your multiplied sacrifices?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am sick of burnt offerings of rams
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the fat of fed beasts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
blood of bullocks, of lambs, or goats,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is no pleasure to Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}When you gather to gaze on My face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who has asked you for these things?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Trample My courts no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Bring offerings no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Vain is the smoke of sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to me \uc1\u8217*tis abomination.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The new moon and Sabbath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the call to assembly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the fast and the festival
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I cannot (endure).
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}They weigh Me down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I am tired of the burden.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}When therefore you spread out your hands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will hide from you Mine eyes;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when you make your many prayers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will not listen to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Your hands are full of blood:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Wash, and make you clean.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Banish out of My sight
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the wicked things that you do.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Cease to do evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Learn to do well.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let justice be ever your care,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
punish the man of violence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
win for the orphan his rights,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and defend the cause of the widow.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Great Alternatives

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Come,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*and now
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let us reason together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your sins, though like scarlet, may yet
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
become white as the snow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And though they be crimson-red,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they may yet be as wool.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}If you be obedient and willing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall taste the good of the land;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}But if you refuse and rebel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Tis the sword you shall taste:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
For the mouth of the {\scaps Lord} has spoken it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Zion\uc1\u8217*s Present Shame and Future Glory

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Alas! how the once faithful City
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has turned to be harlot.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
She that was once full of justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she wherein righteousness lodged,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is now haunted by murderers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Your silver is now become dross,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your wine mixed with water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Your rulers are grown to be rebels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the comrades of the thieves-
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Every man of them fond of his bribe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hunting ever for gifts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
caring nought for the rights of the orphan
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or the cause of the widow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Therefore thus says the Lord, the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Mighty One of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*From Mine enemies who resist Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will get Me the comfort of vengeance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}I will turn My hand against you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will smelt out your dross in the furnace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all your alloy remove.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Judges, like those of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and counsellors as of yore, I will give you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Thereafter shall you called
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the City of Justice, the Faithful City.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}By justice shall Zion be ransomed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and by righteousness her people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}But together rebels and sinners be crushed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those that abandon the {\scaps Lord} shall perish.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Heathen Cult and its Doom

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}For the trees you delight in shall bring you to shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and abashed shall you be for your gardens beloved.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}Like a tree with withered leaves
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall you be-like a waterless garden.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}Like tow shall the strong man become,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the thing he has wrought like a spark;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and both shall burn together
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in a flame that cannot be quenched.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jerusalem the Centre of Blessing to the World; Arbitration, Disarmament, and International Peace
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 2}The message of Isaiah the son of Amoz: his vision of Judah and Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In the after-time it shall be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the mountain of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Shall be set at the head of the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and exalted above the hills.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All the peoples shall thither stream,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Many nations shall go and say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Come, let us go to the mount of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the house of the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
That He in His ways may instruct us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that we in His paths may walk.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For instruction proceeds from Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the word of the {\scaps Lord} from Jerusalem.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He will judge the disputes of the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and for manifold nations so justly will arbitrate
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that their swords they will beat into ploughshares,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to pruning-hooks their spears.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and war they shall learn no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}O household of Jacob, come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let us walk in the light of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Judgment upon the Wealth and Pride of Judah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 the 
{\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s Judgement-Day
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 6}(Get you into the caves of the rocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hide in the holes of the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s dread face, when in glory majestic
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rises with terror to smile the earth.) }
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For He has forsaken His people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the household of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Filled is his land from the east with diviners,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with soothsayers like to the Philistines,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sorcerers, children of aliens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Filled in his land full of silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his treasure is endless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Filled in his land full of horses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his chariots are endless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Filled is his land full of idols,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he worships the work of his hands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the things that his fingers have made.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Get you into the rocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hide in the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s dread presence
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and glory majestic. }
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 11}So the pride of men shall be humbled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
laid low shall man\uc1\u8217*s loftiness be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that day shall the {\scaps Lord} alone be exalted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For a day of the {\scaps Lord} is coming
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
upon all that is haughty and proud,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
upon all that is lofty and high-
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Upon cedars if Lebanon all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and oaks of Bashan all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Upon all the great mountains
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the high hills,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Upon all the proud towers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all fortified walls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Upon all ships of Tarshish
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all gallant craft.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Then the pride of men shall be humbled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
laid low shall man\uc1\u8217*s loftiness be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and that day shall the {\scaps Lord} alone be exalted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}The Idols shall all of them vanish.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Get you into the caves of the rocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the holes of the ground
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s dread face, when in glory majestic
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rises with terror to smile the earth. }
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}That day shall men cast away
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the moles and to the bats
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their idols of silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which they made for themselves to worship;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 21}And into the caves of the rocks they shall get them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and into the rents of the cliffs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s dread face, when in glory majestic
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rises-with terror to smite the earth. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Oh cease your trust in man, in whose nostrils is but a breath. Of what account is he?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Reign of Anarchy
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 3}Behold, the Lord the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
take staff and stay from Jerusalem and Judah-
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Soldiers and Warriors, judges and prophets,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Deviners and elders, and captains of fifty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
men of distinction, and men of sage counsel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cunning magicians and skilful enchanters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And boys I will give then for princes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and men of caprice shall rule over them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The people shall play the tyrant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
each man over his neighbour.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The young shall be rude to the aged,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the man of low rank to the high.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}One shall take hold of his fellow, and say to him:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Your family has a robe;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
come, and do you be our ruler,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and take this ruin in hand.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Then will the other protest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Nay, verily: {\i I} cannot heal you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In my own house there is no bread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor yet is there a robe.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You shall not thrust upon {\i me}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The leadership of the people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Jerusalem is stumbling to ruin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Judah must surely fall;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for by word and by deed they defy the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
provoking those glorious eyes of His.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Their respecting of persons is witness against them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like Sodom they publish their sin undisguisedly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Woe unto them! They have wrought their own ruin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Happy righteous! For well they shall fare,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall reap the fruit of their doings.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But woe to the wicked! For ill they shall fare,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their deeds shall be recompensed unto them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}My people are cruelly governed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
extortions rule over them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
O My people, your leaders mislead,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and confuse the way you should go.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} is taking His place for the trial,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He stands to judge His people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} summons to judgment
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the elders and princes of His people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Yes, {\i you} have devoured the vineyard,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}What mean you by crushing My people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and grinding the faces of the poor?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
says the Lord the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Doom of the Haughty Women

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Moreover the {\scaps Lord} said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Because Zion\uc1\u8217*s daughters are haughty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
walking with heads held high,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and eyes for ever ogling,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with dainty little steps,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and anklets ever jingling,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The Lord shall smite with a scab
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the head of the daughters of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their shame shall the {\scaps Lord} lay bare
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}That day the Lord will remove
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the finery of the anklets,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the net-bands and the moons,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}The ear-drops and bracelets and veils,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The head-dresses, armlets, and sashes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the perfume-boxes and amulets,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}the signet-rings and the nose-rings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}the state-gowns, the mantles, the shawls, and the satchels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}the gauzes and linens, the turbans and veils.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Sweet scents shall give place unto stench,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the girdle be changed for a rope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And well-set hair shall be bald,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and for elegant robe shall be sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for beauty the brand (of a slave).
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Your liegemen shall fall by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your mighty men in the battle.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Her gates shall lament and mourn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as she sixtieth despoiled on the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
  {\cf1 4}That day shall seven women
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}take hold of one man and say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Our own bread will we eat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and our rainment will we wear;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but oh, let us bear your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and take our reproach away.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Zion\uc1\u8217*s Final Glory

\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In that day
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall the wild vegetation be glorious and fair,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the fruit of the tilled land majestic and comely
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for Israel\uc1\u8217*s sons that escape.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}And those that remain in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those that are left in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall be called by the name of holy-
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all who stand in the book of life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}When the Lord shall have washed away
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the filth of the daughters of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and rinsed away from her midst
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the blood-stains of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
by means of the blast of judgment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the blast of extermination,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then will the {\scaps Lord} come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and o\uc1\u8217*er the whole site of mount Zion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and over all the glory
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Shall cover and canopy be \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A shade by day from the heat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a refuge and shelter from storm and rain.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Vineyard with the Wild Grapes

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Song of the Vineyard
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 5}A song will I sing of my friend,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}a love-song touching his vineyard.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A vineyard belonged to my friend,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on a fertile hill-top he had set it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}He had dug it and cleared it of stones,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and choice vines therein he had planted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A tower he had built in the midst,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a winepress therein he had hewn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Then he looked for a yield of good grapes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the grapes that it yielded were wild.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Now judge, you that dwell in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you that are freemen of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
judge between me and my vineyard.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}What more could I do for my vineyard
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I had neglected to do?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And why, when I looked for good grapes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
did it yield only grapes that were wild?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}So now let me give you to know
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what I purpose to do my vineyard.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will tear off its hedge, that the beasts may devour it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will break through its wall, that they trample it down.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I will make it waste, all unpruned and unweeded,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with thorns and with briars overgrown shall it be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the clouds I will order to withhold from it rain.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For the vineyard of the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts is the household of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the freeman of Judah His cherished plantation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But instead of the justice He looked for was bloodshed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
instead of the right was the cry (of the wronged).
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The National Sins: Woe!

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Woe unto you who join house unto house
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and who add one field to another,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
till no one has room but you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you settle the land by yourselves.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} of Hosts in mine ear has whispered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
surely many a great fine house
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be desolate and empty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For ten acres of vineyard shall yield but eight gallons,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the harvest shall be but one tenth of the seed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Woe unto them that rise early
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to give themselves to drink,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and to those that sit late in the evening,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
inflaming themselves with wine;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Whose banquets of wine are enlivened
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with lute, harp, timbrel, and flute;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but all blind to the work of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they see not the things He is doing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore all unaware shall My people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be swept into exile afar \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Their nobleman dying of hunger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their populace parched with thirst.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore Sheol with ravenous throat
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
opens wide her jaws without measure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And down shall her splendour go,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and her noisy tumultuous rabble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with all that in her was exultant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Thus through judgment the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts is exalted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the holy God shows Himself holy by righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}And there shall lambs graze as at pasture,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fatlings shall feed in her ruins.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Woe unto those that draw penalty on
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by their sin, as by stout wagon-ropes drawn by oxen;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}That say, \uc1\u8216*Let Him haste, let Him act with speed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in order that we may see it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let the purpose of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One come
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so near that we recognize it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Woe unto those that call evil good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and good evil;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to those that turn light into darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and darkness to light;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to those that turn sweet into bitter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bitter to sweet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Woe unto those that esteem themselves wise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that fancy themselves to be prudent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Woe unto those that are valiant in wine-drinking,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
warriors brave at the mingling of drink;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Whom a bribe will induce to acquit the guilty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and innocent men to deprive of their rights.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}As fire licks up the stubble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hay is shrivelled in flame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so their root shall turn to rottenness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their blossom go up in dust;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
because they rejected the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s instruction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the message of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One scorned.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Foreign Army is Coming

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}So against His people His anger was kindled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against them He stretched forth His hand and He smote them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the mountains shook, and the dead
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lay like refuse about the streets.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\i For all this His anger is not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but His hand is stretched out still.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}To a far-distant nation He raises His signal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and whistles for them from the end of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
See! hastily, swiftly they come \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}None weary, none stumbling among them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unsleeping and slumbering never:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The band of their loins never loosed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the thong of their shoes never torn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Their arrows are sharp,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their bows are all bent:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The hoofs of their horses are counted as flint,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their wheels as the whirlwind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Their roar is like that of a lioness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and like the young lions they roar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
growling and seizing the prey,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bearing it far beyond rescue.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}That day they shall roar over him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with a roar like the roar of the sea:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When he looks on the earth, behold! darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the light has grown dark in the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Call
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 6}In the year that King Uzi died, I had a vision of the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne, and {\super\cf2\fs24 2}the skirts if His robe filled the Temple. Before Him were standing seraphs, each with six wings \uc1\u8211* two for covering the face, two the loins, and two {\super\cf2\fs24 3}to fly with; and thus they kept calling to one another:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Holy, holy, holy, is the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the whole earth is filled with His glory.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}At the sound of their calling the foundations of threshold shook, and the House began to fill {\super\cf2\fs24 5}with smoke. Then I said
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Woe is me, for I am undone;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for a man of unclean lips am I,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I dwell in a nation of unclean lips;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and yet mine eyes have seen
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the King, the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Then one of the seraphs flew to me with a live coal in his hand, which with tongs he had taken {\super\cf2\fs24 7}from off the altar. With this he touched my mouth, and said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*See, this has touched your lips:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Your guilt is past and your sin forgiven.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Then I heard the voice of the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
saying, \uc1\u8216*Whom shall I send? who will go for us?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And I said, \uc1\u8216*Here am I, send me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Then He said, \uc1\u8216*Go and say to this people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8217*Hear ever, but understand never;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
see ever, but comprehend never.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Make the people\uc1\u8217*s minds dull,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
block their ears and cover their eyes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lest they see with their eyes, lest they hear with their ears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their minds understand, and their health come again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Then I said, \uc1\u8216*Till cities lie wasted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with not an inhabitant left;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
till houses hold men no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the land is left a desolation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}till the {\scaps Lord} removes men afar
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wide tracts of the land lie forsaken.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And should there be in it a tenth still left,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that too, in its turn, must be given to the fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the stump of an oak or a terebinth felled.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Crisis Created by the Menace to Judah in 735 B.C.

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s World to the Terrified King
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 7}In the days Ahaz, the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, Rezin King of Aram, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, King of Israel, marched against Jerusalem to attack it: but they were unable to develop an actual assault upon it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}When news reached the Court that the Aramean army was on Ephraimite soil, the heart of Ahaz and his people shook like forest-trees before the {\super\cf2\fs24 3}wind. Then the {\scaps Lord} said to Isaiah, \uc1\u8216*Go out\uc1\u8211* you and your son Shear-yashub \uc1\u8211* to meet Ahaz at the end of the conduit of the upper pool on the {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Fuller\uc1\u8217*s Field Road, and say to him: Be careful to keep calm: be not faint-hearted or afraid of this pair of fire-brands that are nothing but smoking stumps. Be not afraid of the fierce anger of Rezin {\super\cf2\fs24 5}and Aram and the son of Remaliah. Aram and Ephraim with the son of Remaliah have indeed {\super\cf2\fs24 6}plotted your ruin: their purpose is to invade Judah, and, after reducing her straits, to break into (Jerusalem); then, having overpowered her, they purpose to set the son of Tabeelon the throne.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8217*This thing shall not succeed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it shall not come to pass.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For the head of Aram is Damascus,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the head of Damascus is Rezin;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The head of Ephraim is Samaria,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the head of Samaria is the son of Remaliah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your faith must firmly hold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
if you would yourselves be held.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Great Refusal and the Sign

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}One more I addressed Ahaz thus, \uc1\u8216*Ask the {\scaps Lord} {\super\cf2\fs24 11}your God for a sign \uc1\u8211* ask it (if you like) either from the depths of the under-world or from the heights above.\uc1\u8217* {\super\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* replied Ahaz, \uc1\u8216*I will not ask for one: that would be equivalent to submitting the {\scaps Lord} to a test.\uc1\u8217* {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Then I said, \uc1\u8216*Hear then, you household of David. Is not enough for you to weary mortal men that you must weary my God as well? {\super\cf2\fs24 14}You shall have a sign therefore from the Lord Himself. Behold!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A maid is with child, she shall bring forth a son,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shall call his name Immanuel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Honey and curd shall he eat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when he knows how to choose what is good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to shun what is evil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For ere the child shall know
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how to choose what is good
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to shun what is evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that land shall be deserted
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose two kings you so dreaded.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Judah shall also be Ravaged

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The {\scaps Lord} shall bring upon you your people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on your father\uc1\u8217*s house
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
such days as have never yet been,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
since Ephraim departed from Judah
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}That day it shall come to pass
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that the {\scaps Lord} shall whistle for the flies and the bees.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}They shall come every one, and then down they
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall settle
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in the steep-walled ravines and in clefts of the rocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on all thorn-hedges and places of pasture.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}That day shall the Lord shave bare
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with a razor that is hired
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the land beyond the River
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
both the head and hidden hair;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the beard too shall be snipped.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}And in that day shall a man
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
keep but two sheep and a cow;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Yet the plenteous yield of milk
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall supply him fare of curd.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the fare of every man
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that is left upon the land
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be nought but curd and honey.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}And in that day every spot
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where were once a thousand vines,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
worth a thousand silver pieces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall with thorns and briers be covered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}With bow and with arrow shall men come thither,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all the land shall be thorns and briers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Fear of thorns and briers shall hold men afar
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the hills that used to be hoed with the hoe.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
There cattle shall wander and sheep shall tread.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fall of Damascus and Samaria
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 8}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} said to me, \uc1\u8216*Take a large tablet, and write upon it in the common script \uc1\u8217*Speed-spoil {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Hurry-prey;\uc1\u8217* and take (two) reliable witnesses, {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Uriah the priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.\uc1\u8217* Then after the prophetess, through my approach to her, had conceived and borne a son, the {\scaps Lord} said to me, \uc1\u8216*Call his name Speed-spoil Hurry-prey.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For ere the child shall know
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how to cry \uc1\u8217*My farther! My mother!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The wealth of Damascus, the spoil of Samaria,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be carried away to the king of Assyria.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Invasion of Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Once more I had a message from the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211* it was this:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Because this people has spurned
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the gentle stream of Shiloah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and melt with fear of Rezin
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the son of Remaliah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore, behold, the Lord
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will speedily bring upon them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the waters of the River,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the great and mighty River
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it shall rise above all its channels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and overflow all its banks.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}On it shall sweep over Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
an overflowing flood
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that shall reach as high as the neck.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But (the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s) outstretched wings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall cover the breadth of the land;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for with us is God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Futility of Opposition to Judah

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You may storm as you will, you nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall be shattered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All you far-distant lands
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the earth, give ear.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You may gird yourselves for the fray,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you all shall be shattered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}You may forge your plans as you will,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall all be confounded.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Be your resolves what they will,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall not be accomplished;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for with us is God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 None is to be Feared but the 
{\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}These were the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s words to me, as He grasped me with His hand and warned me not to walk in the ways of the people:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Call you not all a conspiracy
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that this people calls conspiracy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Share not their fears and their dreads.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts \uc1\u8211* it is He
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you should count as the great Conspirator.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let Him be your fear and your dread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}A stone and a rock He shall prove, whereon
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
both houses of Israel shall strike and stumble \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a trap and a snare to the folk of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Many among them shall stumble and fall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be broken and snared and taken.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Isaiah\uc1\u8217*s Patient Hope

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}I will seal my teaching and fasten my message {\super\cf2\fs24 17}in (the heart of) my disciples. I will patiently wait for the {\scaps Lord} who hides His face from the {\super\cf2\fs24 18}household of Israel; I will set my hope in Him. I myself and the children the {\scaps Lord} has given me are in Israel as signs and symbols from the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts whose home is on Mount Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Awful Plight of Unbelieving Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}When they tell you have recourse to ghosts and familiar spirits that chirp and mutter, ask them if a nation should not rather have recourse to its God. Why should they consult the dead on behalf {\super\cf2\fs24 20}of the living? Assuredly they shall (one day) clamour for the teaching and the message, when there is no day-break for them any more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}They shall range through the land sore pressed and hungry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hunger shall curse their king and their God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}They shall lift up their eyes to the heavens above,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall look to the earth beneath;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but nought shall they see save distress and anguish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and thick impenetrable gloom.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Great Deliverance and the Glorious King
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 9}In the former time He brought the territory of Zebulon and Naphtali into contempt, but in the latter time has He covered with glory the ground held by the nations beyond the Jordan on the way to the sea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The people that walked in darkness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have seen a glorious light:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Those that dwelt in the land of gloom \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on them the light has shone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}You have multiplied their gladness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and given them great joy:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The joy they made in Your presence
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
was like the joy of harvest;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their gladness was like the gladness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of men who divide the spoil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For the yoke that pressed so heavy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the bar upon their shoulders,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the rod of their taskmasters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have broken as on Midian\uc1\u8217*s day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Every boot of thundering warrior,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
every war-cloak drenched with blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
is destined for the burning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be fuel for the fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For to us a child is born,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto us a son is given,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
on whose shoulder is dominion;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and this is the name he bears \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Counsellor most wonderful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
god with the warrior might,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
father everlasting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
prince of the reign of peace.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Great is the dominion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and endless is the peace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
upon the throne of David,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and over all his realm:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To establish and uphold it
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the righteousness and justice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from henceforth and for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The zeal of the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall bring this thing to pass.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Doom of Israel

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The Lord sent a word into Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on Israel it shall alight
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}With a power all the people shall feel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in Ephraim and in Samaria.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They have stiffened their neck in pride,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in their stoutness of heart they have said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*The bricks are fallen down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but now we will build with hewn stone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The sycamores are cut down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but with cedars we will replace them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}So against them the {\scaps Lord} has stirred up their foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has spurred their enemies on;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Syrians east, and Philistines west,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have with open mouth devoured Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\i Yet for all this His anger is not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but His hand is stretched out still. }
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But the people turned not unto Him that smote them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor did they resort to the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}So He cut off from Israel head and tail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
palm-branch and rush in a single day.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The elders and men of repute are the head,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the prophets whose teaching is false are the tail.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Those who should lead this people mislead them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those whom they ought to have led are destroyed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The Lord will therefore not spare their youths,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on their orphans and widows He teeth no pity
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for each and all are profane and wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and every mouth speaks impious folly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\i Yet for all this His anger is not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but His hand is stretched out still.}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}For wickedness blazed like a fire
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that devours first thorns and briers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then sets forest thickets aflame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till they roll in columns of smoke.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}By the breath of the {\scaps Lord} the land was scorched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the people became like cannibals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}They carved on the right, yet were hungry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
devoured on the left, unappeased;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
no man did pity his fellow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but each ate the flesh of his neighbour \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and both against Judah together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\i Yet for all this His anger is not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but His hand is stretched out still.}
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 10}Woe unto those that give mischievous verdicts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}elaborate scrolls that bring sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}By robbing the weak of their rights
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and by plundering the poor of their due,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so that widows become their spoil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and orphans fall a prey.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}But what will you do in the Day of Assize
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which will come like a crash from afar?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To whom will you flee for help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and where will you leave your abundance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}That you crouch not under the prisoners
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or fall among the slain?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yet for all this His anger is not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but his hand is stretched out still.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Doom of Assyria

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Two Plans \uc1\u8211* Assyria\uc1\u8217*s and the Lord\uc1\u8217*s

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Oh! Assyria! Rod of mine anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and staff of Mine indignation!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Against an impious people I send Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a nation that sore has provoked Me to wrath;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and I solemnly charge him to spoil and to plunder
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trample them down like the mire of the streets.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Not such, however, {\i his} fancy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor such the thought of his heart;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but his thought is the utter destruction
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of nations not a few.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Are my captains,\uc1\u8217* he says, \uc1\u8216*not all kings?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Is not Calno\uc1\u8217*s fate like Carchemish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and Hamath\uc1\u8217*s fate like Arpad\uc1\u8217*s,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Samaria\uc1\u8217*s like Damascus?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}My hand has seized those kingdoms
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with images more than Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}And shall I not do to Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to her images also,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as I have done to Samaria
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to her idols also?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}When the Lord has accomplished all His work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, He will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria and the glory of his lofty looks. For the Lord has said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}By the strength of my hand have I done it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and by my cunning discernment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
removing the bounds of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and plundering their treasures.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I have brought down cities to ashes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to dust those that dwell therein.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I thrust my hand in the wealth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the nations, as into a nest;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all the earth have I gathered
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as one gathers eggs that are left:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
There was not a wing that fluttered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
none opened the mouth or chirped.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Shall an axe boast over the man that wields it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or saw treat with insolence him that handles it?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
As if ever a rod could swing him that lifts it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or staff of wood could brandish a man!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fate of Assyria and Judah

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}So into his fat shall the Lord
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts send leanness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and under his splendour a burning
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall burn like the burning of fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}That flaming fire is the Holy One,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he that is Israel\uc1\u8217*s Light;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it shall blaze and devour his thorns
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his briers in a single day.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}His glorious forest and gardens
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall vanish, body and soul,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a sick man pinning away;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}And his forest trees that are left
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be few, that a child may record them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}That day it shall come to pass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that no more shall the remnant of Jacob
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
or those that escape of the household of Israel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lean upon him that smote them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall loyally lean on the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}A remnant shall return,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even a remnant of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto the mighty God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For though your people, O Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be even as the sand of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the remnant of them shall return.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Destruction is decreed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
breaking in like a flood of judgment.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For destruction, fixed and final,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts will accomplish
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the midst of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Consolation of Zion: Assyria will assuredly fall

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Therefore thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*You My people who dwell in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
be not afraid of Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who smites you with the sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and lifted this staff against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as Egypt did not old.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}For yet a little while,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my fury will be spent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Mine Anger shall have an end.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Over him shall the {\scaps Lord} brandish
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a scourge like that which smote
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
upon Median at Raven\uc1\u8217*s Rock.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And that rod of His over the sea \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will lift it up once more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as He did against Egypt of old.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}His burden shall pass from your shoulder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his yoke press your neck no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From Rimmon he has gone up
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}He has come as far as Ai,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
through Migron he has passed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has stored his baggage at Michmash,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}He has gone across the pass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has bivouacked in Geber.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Raman is all a-tremble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
gibeah of Saul is in flight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}You people of Gallim, shriek;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
listen, O Laishah;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
answer her, Anathoth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}Madmenah takes to flight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The people of Gebin seek refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}This day he will halt at Nob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He shakes his fist against
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Mount of the daughter of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hill of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}But see! the Lord the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is lopping the branches with fearful crash;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those that were lofty are now laid low.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}He strikes with His axe the wild thickets away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Lebanon\uc1\u8217*s glorious cedar are fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Bliss of Israel in the Latter Days

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Messianic King and Kingdom
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 11}There shall come forth a shoot from the stock of Jesse,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and out of his roots shall a branch sprout forth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own spirit shall rest upon him \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the spirit of wisdom and insight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the spirit of counsel and might,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the knowledge and fear of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He will not judge after the sight of his eyes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor decide by the words that are poured in his ears;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But with justice shall he deal with the cause of the helpless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the case of the poor he will settle with equity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
With the rod of his mouth he will smite the tyrant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and slay the unjust with the breath of his lips.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}His loins shall be girt with the girdle of justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his waist shall be bound with the circlet of faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The wolf shall lodge with the lamb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the leopard lie down with the kid;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the calf and the lion together shall graze,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a little chid shall lead them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The cow and the bear shall be friends,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their young ones shall lie down together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Lion shall eat straw like the ox.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The suckling shall play o\uc1\u8217*er the hole of the asp,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the weaned child trot in the lair of the viper.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}None shall do hurt or havoc
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on all My holy mountain:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For then shall the earth be filled
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the knowledge of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the waters cover sea.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Triumphant Return

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}That day it shall come to pass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that the Root of Jesse who stands
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as ensign to the peoples \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To him shall the nations resort,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his resting-place shall be glorious.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}That day shall again lift His hand
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to recover the rest of His folk
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that are left in Assyria and Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in Pathros, in Cush, and in Elam,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in Shinar and Hamath and lands by the sea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}He will raise for the nations a signal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gather the outcast of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and Judah\uc1\u8217*s dispersed shall assemble
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from all the four corners of earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}All envy of Ephraim shall vanish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cut off shall be all that vex Judah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No longer shall Ephraim be jealous of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor Judah be hostile of Ephraim.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}They shall swoop down the slope of the Philistines westward,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and plunder together the sons of the East;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they shall lay a stern hand upon Edom and Moab,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bring to subjection the children of Ammon.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The {\scaps Lord} will also dry up
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tongue of the sea of Egypt;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with the fiery glow of His breath
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he will swing His hand over the River,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and smite it to seven streams
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
such that men may go over in sandals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}And such of His folk as are left
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall return from Assyria on a highway
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like that on which Israel trod
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the day he came up out of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Song of Thanksgiving
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 12}In that day you shall say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}\uc1\u8216*I give You thanks, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for though You were angry with me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
thine anger is turned away
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you have comforted me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}See! God is my salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I trust Him unafraid.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For my strength and my song is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and He is become my salvation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}With joy shall you draw water
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the fountains of salvation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And in that day shall you say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} and call on His name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Make know to the nations what things He has done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
record that His name is exalted on high.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}To the {\scaps Lord} make music, for He has wrought
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
proudly;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let this be made known through the length of the world.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Lift up your voices, you dwellers in Zion;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Prophecies Concerning Foreign Nations

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Prophecy Concerning Babylon

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Doom of Babylon
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 13}Oracle on Babylon: a vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}On a bare height raise the signal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cry aloud to them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Wave you the hand that they enter
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the gates of those lordly men.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I have myself commissioned
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my consecrated servants
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to execute Mine anger.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, I have summoned My warriors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my proudly exultant ones.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Hark! on the hills a tumult
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as of a mighty multitude.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Hark! it\uc1\u8217*s the roar of kingdoms,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of nations gathering together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} of Hosts is mustering
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his army for the battle.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They come from a distant land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the uttermost end of heaven \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord}, with His weapons of wrath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to ruin all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Wail! for the day of the {\scaps Lord} is nigh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like destruction from God Almighty it cometh.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}All hands shall therefore hang helpless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
each mortal heart will melt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}And men will be confounded.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Taken with throes and pangs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall writhe like a woman in travail.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall look on each other astonished,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with faces all aflame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Behold! the {\scaps Lord} cometh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with wrath and hot anger cruel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to make earth a desolation
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and destroy the sinners upon it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The heavens and their constellations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall not flash any light;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the sun shall be dark when it rises,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no light of moon shall shine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I will punish the world for its evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the godless for their guilt;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will still the conceit of the arrogant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tyrant\uc1\u8217*s pride lay low.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}And men shall be rarer than gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, mortals than gold of Ophir.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The heavens shall therefore tremble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth quake out of her place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
at the wrath of the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the day of the heat of His anger.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}And then, like a hunted gazelle,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or like sheep that have no one to fold them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall each set his face to his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and each to his own land flee.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Whoso is found shall be stabbed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by the sword shall he fall who is caught.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Their babes shall be dashed in pieces
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before their very eyes;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their houses shall be plundered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ravished their wives shall be.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Behold! I already am stirring
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the people of Media against them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No thought have they of silver,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no pleasure take they in gold.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}(They grasp their) bows (and spears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fearful are they and cruel;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they shall smite) the young men (all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the maids) shall be dashed in pieces.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To the fruit of the womb they are ruthless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and children they eye without pity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Thus Babylon, fairest of kingdoms,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the glory and pride of Chaldea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall perish with doom like the doom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to which God hurled Gomorrah and Sodom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}For ever shall she be desolate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tenantless age after age.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No Arab shall pitch his tent there,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no shepherd shall fold his flock there;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}But there shall wild cats lie,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their homes shall be crowded with jackals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And there shall ostriches dwell,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and there shall satyrs dance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Hyenas shall howl in her castles,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wolves in her halls of delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Her time is wellnigh come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her day lasts not much longer.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Song of Triumph over the Fall of Babylon\uc1\u8217*s King
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 14}For the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} will take pity on Jacob, He will elect Israel once more and settle them on their own land: resident aliens will join them and attach themselves to the household {\super\cf2\fs24 2}of Jacob. (Alien) people will take them and bring them to their place; and the household of Israel shall employ them in the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s land as men-servants and maid-servants, thus reducing their erstwhile captors to captivity, and lording it over those who had been their taskmasters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Then, in the day that the {\scaps Lord} gives you rest from your toil and turmoil and from the hard service that was {\super\cf2\fs24 4}laid upon you, you shall take up this taunt-song over the King of Babylon, and say:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
How still the oppressor is grown!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How still is the insolent raging!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} has broken the staff
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the godless, the sceptre of tyrants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}That smote the peoples in fury
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with unremitting stroke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that trod down the nations in anger
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with unrelenting tread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}All earth is at rest, is quiet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they break into happy cries.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at they fate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the cedars of Lebanon, saying,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Since you have been laid low,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no woodsman is come to destroy us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Sheol beneath is a-quiver,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
awaiting your arrival;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
she rousted the shades to greet the \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all that were chieftains on earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All the kings of the nations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she bids arise from their thrones.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}All of them lift up their voices,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and thus they say unto you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*So you, too, are feeble as we;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you are become like us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Your pomp has been brought down to Sheol \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the strumming of your lutes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Beneath you the maggots are spread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your coverlet is worms.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}How are you fallen from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you radiant son of the morning!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
How are you struck to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lying stiff, a corpse upon corpses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And you, you did say in your heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Into heaven I will ascend;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will set my throne on high
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
above the stars of God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and sit on the sacred Mountain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the uttermost parts of the north.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I will climb above the cloud-peaks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rival the Most High.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}But down you are brought to Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the very depths of the pit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}They that see you shall gaze and gaze,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall ask with eyes intent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Is this the man that startled the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sent tremors through her kingdoms;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}That made the world like a desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and overthrew her cities;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that left not his prisoners free,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to return each man to his home?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Now in their honoured tombs
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the kings of the nations are lying;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}But you are cast forth, tombless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a hateful untimely birth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
clothed upon with the slain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose bodies the sword has pierced,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that go down to the floor of the pit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a carcase trodden under foot.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}You shall not be joined unto them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the place where they lie buried;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
because you have ruined your land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your people you have slaughtered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
May it never be named again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the race of this evil-doer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Get ready the knife for his sons,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to atone for the guilt of their father;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lest they rise and posses the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fill the face of the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}I will rise up against them, says the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts, cut off from Babylon record and remnant, kith and kin, says the {\scaps Lord}. And I will make it a possession of the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, says the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Invincible World-Plan

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}The {\scaps Lord} of Hosts has sworn this oath:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
My plan shall most surely be done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the thing that I purposed shall stand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}On the land that is Mine I will shatter Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trample him down on My mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His yoke shall oppress them no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his burden shall pass from their shoulders
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}This is the purpose formed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to humble all the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and this is the Hand outstretched
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against the nations all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}For who can bring to nought
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts has purposed?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And when His is the Hand that is outstretched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who can turn it back?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Warning to Philistia

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}In the year that King Ahaz died, came this oracle:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Rejoice not, you Philistines all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the rod that has scourged you is broken;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for an asp from the root of the root of the serpent shall issue,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
its fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}For the poor shall feed on My meadows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the needy shall lie down secure;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but your seed I will kill with famine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your remnant I will slay.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}Wail, you gates; and shriek, you cities:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Melt with fear, you Philistines all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For out of the north cometh smoke (of war),
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the ranks of the foe shall no straggler be found.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}What answer shall (Judah) make
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the envoys of that nation?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
That \uc1\u8216*the {\scaps Lord} Himself is the founder of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and there do His suffering people find refuge.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Lament over Moab
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 15}Oracle on Moab
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Alas! in a night has AR-Moab
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
been wasted and ruined.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Alas! in a night has Kir-Moab
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
been wasted and ruined.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Gone up is the daughter of Dibon
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to weep on the heights;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
on the summits of Nebo and Medeba
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
moab wails.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
On every head there is baldness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and beards are all shorn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}On her streets they have girt them with sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on roofs is lament;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
on her squares, one and all they are wailing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with torrents of tears.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Heshbon and Elealeh cry out,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their cry reaches Jahaz;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whereat Moab\uc1\u8217*s loins fall a-quiver,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the soul of her quivers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}My heart cruet out for Moab,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they flee towards Zoar; They climb the ascent unto Luhith.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And weep as they go;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they raise on the way to Horonaim
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a cry of destruction.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For ruin has clean overtaken
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the waters of Nimrim;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the herbage is gone, the grass withered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and verdure is none.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}So they bring o\uc1\u8217*er the Brook of the Willows
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their riches and stores;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For the cry (of despair) has gone round
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the borders of Moab;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the wail thereof reaches Eglaim,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it reaches Beer-elim.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For the waters of Dimon are bloody.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Yet more will I bring upon Dimon \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A lion on those that escape
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and are left out of Moab.
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 16}Tribute of lambs they despatched.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}To the lord of the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the Sela, by way of the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto Mount Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}And then at the fords of the Arnon
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the daughters of Moab
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall flutter like birds, and shall fly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as when nestlings are scattered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Grant us the laid of you counsel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and mediate (for us);
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shelter us as in the noon-tide
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with shade deep as night.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Bring into shelter the outcasts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
betray no the fugitives;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Suffer the outcasts of Moab
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to dwell in your land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Be you a shelter to them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the face of the spoiler.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When the ruthless are brought to an end,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the spoiler has ceased;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when the heel of the tyrant has vanished
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
clean out of the land;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then the throne shall be established by kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on it shall sit
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in the tent of King David in faithfullness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
one who will judge
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with a spirit intent on the right
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on promptness of justice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}We have heard of the pride of Moab,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the utterly proud \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Of her haughty and insolent pride,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and her prating all baseless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}So Moab for Moab is wailing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she wails altogether;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yea, utterly stricken they moan
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the cakes of Kir-heres.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The vine-tracts of Heshbon are withered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the vineyards of Sabah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose choice red wine has laid low
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
many a lord of the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Her cluster did stretch unto Jazer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they strayed to the desert.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Her tendrils were spread far abroad,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they passed over the sea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}So I share in the weeping of Jazer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the vineyards of Sibmah;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I drench you with my tears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o Heshbon and Elealeh:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For over your grapes and your vintage
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the war-cry is fallen.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}From the land of gardens is vanished
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all gladness and joy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
there resounds no cry in the vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no shout any more;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
no wine in the presses is trodden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the shouting is stilled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}so my soul like a harp makes moaning for Moab,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my heart for Kir-heres.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}When Moab appears on the heights
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and makes herself weary,
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Prophecy Concerning Damascus and Northern Israel

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Destruction of Damascus
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 17}Oracle on Damascus
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}See! soon shall Damascus no more be a city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but only ruin, forsaken for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}To the grazing of flocks shall her cities be given,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and there shall they lie, with not one to affright them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The fortress shall vanish from Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the dynasty from Damascus.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The remnant of Aram shall perish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their fate shall be Israel\uc1\u8217*s fate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Doom of Israel

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}That day it shall come to pass
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that the glory of Jacob shall pale,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the fat of his flesh shall be wasted;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Or like gleanings it shall be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when a reaper gathers the corn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and his arm reaps the ears \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the ears of corn that are gleaned
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the valley of Rephaim;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Or the gleanings that are left
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when an olive-tree has been beaten \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A berry or two on the uppermost branch,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
four of five on the boughs of a fruit tree:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Thus says the {\scaps Lord}, the God of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In that day men shall look to their Maker,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turn their eyes unto Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Not to the work of their hands shall they look,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor to things that their fingers have made shall they turn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}That day shall your cities deserted be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the derelict cities of Hivite and Amorite.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Because you forgot the God who had helped you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and did not remember the Rock of your Refuge;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
though you planted Adonis\uc1\u8217* gardens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stocked them with alien slips;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Though you fence them the day they are set,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and next morn bring your seedlings to blossom:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your harvest shall vanish away
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the day of your sickness and desperate pain.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Speedy Doom of the Assyrians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Their Sudden Destruction

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Ha!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The uproar of peoples many!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They roar like the roar of the sea:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The thunder of mighty nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they thunder as Ocean thunders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But the {\scaps Lord} shall rebuke them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and far they shall flee, pursued
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like chaff on the hills before wind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or like dust in the face of the hurricane.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}At even-tide, lo! terror:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Ere morning they are gone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Such is the fate of those that despoil us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the lot of those that plunder us.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Isaiah\uc1\u8217*s Answer to the Ethiopian Ambassadors
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 18}Ah, land of the buzzing of wings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}beyond the rivers of Cush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}That despatches ambassadors over the sea
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in vessels of reed on the face of the waters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Depart, you messengers fleet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to your tall and bronze-skinned people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose land is divided by rivers \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your nation strong and victorious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
dreaded both near and far.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}All you that inhabit the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and dwell upon the earth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When a signal is raised, beware,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hark, when the trumpet is blown.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For thus says the {\scaps Lord} to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8217*From My place I watch untroubled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
still as shimmering heat in sunshine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or dew-clouds in time of harvest.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For before the harvest, when blossom is over,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the berry becomes a ripening grape,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he will lop off the branches with pruning-hooks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will server the tendrils and cast them away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}They shall all be left to the beasts of the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the ravenous birds that haunt the mountains;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all summer the ravenous birds shall devour them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all winter the beasts of the land shall consume them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}At that time shall a gift of homage be brought to the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts from that tall and bronze-skinned people, whose land is divided by rivers \uc1\u8211* that nation strong and victorious, dreaded near and far \uc1\u8211* to Mount Zion, the place of the name of the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Destiny of Egypt

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Disaster of Egypt

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
Oracle on Egypt 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 19}Behold! on swift cloud riding
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}the {\scaps Lord} is coming to Egypt:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The idols of Egypt shall quake at His presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the heart of Egypt shall melt within her.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I will spur on Egypt to fight against Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
brother with brother, and neighbour with neighbour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
city with city, and kingdom with kingdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Then will Egypt be drained of the spirit within her,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will confound her counsels:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To idols and muttering wraiths they shall seek,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to ghosts and familiar spirits.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And I will deliver Egypt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
into a stern lord\uc1\u8217*s hands;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a king that is fierce shall rule over her,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
saithe the Lord the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}And the sea shall be drained of its water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the river be parched and dry;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Its branches shall dwindle and stink,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the arms of the Nile shall be parched.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Reeds and rushes shall wither,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The sedge on its brink shall shrivel;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all that is sown by the Nile
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be withered and whirled into nothing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The fishers mourn and lament,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that cast their hook in the Nile;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all the spread their nets
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the face of the waters shall languish.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The workers in flax shall be shamed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the combers and weavers of white stuff;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The weavers of cloth shall be crushed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the workers for hire shall be sorrowful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Sheer fools are the princes of Zoan;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the wisest of Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s counsellors
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
prove but a witless council.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
How then can you say unto Pharaoh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*A son of the wise am I,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a son of ancient kings\uc1\u8217*?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Where are your wise men, then?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let them, pray, declare unto you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and make known what the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has purposed to do unto Egypt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Befooled are the princes of Zoan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
deceived are the princes of Memphis;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the chieftains of her tribes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have led Egypt all astray.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} has mingled within them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the spirit of clouded judgment;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and so they led Egypt astray
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in all her enterprise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as a drunkard strays in his vomit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Thus head, tail, palm-branch and rush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall nothing accomplish for Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Conversion of Egypt

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}In that day shall Egypt fear and tremble like a woman, at the Hand which the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts {\super\cf2\fs24 17}will swing over her. The land of Judah shall be a terror to her; the very mention of the name shall fill her with dread at the thought of the purpose which the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts has formed against her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}In that day there shall be in the land of Egypt five cities speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing allegiance to the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts; and one of them shall be called the City of the Sun.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}In that day there shall be an altar to the {\scaps Lord} in the heart of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to {\super\cf2\fs24 20}the {\scaps Lord} at the border. It shall be a sign and a witness to the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts in the land of Egypt: for when, under oppression, they cry to the {\scaps Lord} to send a deliver, He will intervene and rescue {\super\cf2\fs24 21}them. And the {\scaps Lord} will reveal Himself to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall acknowledge the {\scaps Lord} on that day: they shall worship Him with sacrifice and offering, they shall make vows to the {\scaps Lord} and discharge them. the {\scaps Lord} will smite {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Egypt \uc1\u8211* smite and heal her: when they turn to the {\scaps Lord}, He will heal them in answer to their entreaty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}In that day there shall be a highway between Egypt and Assyria; Assyrians will come to Egypt, And Egyptians to Assyria: Egyptians and Assyrians shall worship (the {\scaps Lord}) in common. {\super\cf2\fs24 24}In that day Israel will join Egypt and Assyria in a triple alliance, and so bring blessing to the world {\super\cf2\fs24 25}around, which the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts has in these words blessed: \uc1\u8216*Blessed be Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel My inheritance.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Warning against the Folly of an Alliance with Egypt
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 20}At that time Isaiah the son of Amoz received a message from the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, bidding him go and take the sackcloth from his loins and the sandals from his feet; and this he did, going about without {\super\cf2\fs24 2}mantle of shoe. Then in the year that the Tartan, who had been despatched by Sargon King of Assyria, {\super\cf2\fs24 3}came to Ashdod and took it by storm, the {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8216*Just as My servant Isaiah has gone for three years without mantle of shoe for a sign and a symbol to {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Egypt and Ethiopia, so shall the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, be led away by the King of Assyria \uc1\u8211* without mantle or {\super\cf2\fs24 5}shoe, and with buttocks exposed. Then those who had looked with hope to Ethiopia and made their boast of Egypt, shall be put to shame and dismay {\super\cf2\fs24 6}And in that day the people who live in the coast-land shall say, \uc1\u8217*If this be the fate of those to whom we had fled in expectation of help and deliverance from the King of Assyria, how can {\i we} escape?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Fall of Babylon

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fall of Babylon: Its Consequences for Judah
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 21}Oracle on the Wilderness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Like the roar of the whirlwind
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that sweeps through the southland,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it comes from the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that land of dread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}A vision full stern
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has been told unto me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The robber still robs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the spoiler still spoils.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Go up, O Elam;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o Media, lay siege:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All the sighs of the crushed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have I brought to an end.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For this cause my loins
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are filled with anguish;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with pangs am I seized
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a woman in travail.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I writhe with the message,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the vision confounds me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My mind goes a-wandering,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
horror appals me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the twilight I love
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has been turned into trembling.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The tables are ready,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the carpets are spread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are eating and drinking.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Arise, you princes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
spread oil on the shields.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For on this wise the Lord
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has spoken to me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Go, station a watchman
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to tell what he sees.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}If he seethe a troop,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
horsemen in pairs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a train of asses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a train of camels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then let him give heed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with most diligent heed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}And the watchman cried,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*On the watch-tower, O Lord,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do I stand all the day;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
at my post am I stationed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the live-long night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Lo! a troop I see coming,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of horsemen in pairs.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And he uttered these words,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Fallen, fallen is Babylon:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Down to the ground
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fall her images shattered.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}You my folk that were threshed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the corn of the floor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
i have told you my message
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from Israel\uc1\u8217*s God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fall of Babylon: Its Consequences for the Trading Tribes of the Desert!

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Oracle of Edom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
One calls to me out of Seir,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Watchman, how late in the night?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Watchman, how late in the night?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The watchman made answer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*The morning approached,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but still it is night.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
If you would enquire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
come hither again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Oracle \uc1\u8216*in the steppe\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In the bush, in the steppe, you must lodge for the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you caravans of Dedan.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}You dwellers in Temas\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
bring water to meet the thirsty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and offer the fugitives bread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For before the sword they are fled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before the whetted sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
before the bow that is bent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before the press of battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For thus has the Lord said unto me, \uc1\u8216*Within a year, no more and no less, shall all the glory of {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Kadar be at an end; and few shall remain of the mighty archers of the Kedareness. the {\scaps Lord} the God of Israel has decreed it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Judah\uc1\u8217*s Unpardonable Sin
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 22}Oracle on the Valley of Vision
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}What mean you that you are gone up,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
one and all, to the house-tops,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}O town filled with uproar and tumult,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o City exultant?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your slain are not slain with sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
neither fallen in battle.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Your chieftains are all fled together
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that wielded the bow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and your strong men are all taken prisoners,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
though far they had fled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Turn away from me,\uc1\u8217* therefore I say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Bitter tears would I shed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Urge not upon me your comfort,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my people are ruined.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For a day of confusion and trampling and tumult,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
doth come from the Lord, the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They tear down the wall in the Valley of Hanno,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the war-cry ascends to the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Elam seized the quiver,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Aram came riding on horses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Kir uncovered the shield,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Your choicest of valleys was crowded
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with chariots and horsemen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
arrayed for assault on the gate.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Then you looked to the arms in the House of the
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
forest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You had eyes for the gaps in the Fortress of
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
davis;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But you looked not to Him that was doing all this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you had no eyes for Him who had planned it of old.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}So the Lord, the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts, has called you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to weeping and mourning, to baldness and sackcloth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But see! there is nothing but mirth and rejoicing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
slaying of oxen and killing of sheep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
eating of meat and drinking of wine \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Eating and drinking, \uc1\u8216*because\uc1\u8217* (as you say)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*We may haply be dead men to-morrow.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} of Hosts has declared in mine ear,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*This sin shall assuredly never be purged
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till you die\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* says the Lord, the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Personal Threats and Promises

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Doom of Sheba

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Against Shebna, the Governor of the Palace.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
go, get you yonder perfect (and say),
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*What right have you here, and what kin have you here,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you hew you here a sepulchre \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
That here on the height you dost hew you a sepulchre,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
carving a home for yourself on the rock?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Behold, the {\scaps Lord} will firmly enwrap you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wind you and wind you around and around:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}He will hurl you and hurl you afar like a ball,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
mighty man that you are, to a spacious land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Thither your glorious chariots shall follow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and there shall you die,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you disgrace of the house of your lord.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Exaltation of Eliakim

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}I will thrust you from your office,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tear you down from your post.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}That day will I summon My servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
eliakim, son of Hilkiah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}I will put your mantle upon him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and give your authority into this hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And a father shall he be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the folk of Jerusalem and the household of
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
judah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}I will lay upon his shoulder
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they key of the house of David,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so that none may shut when he opens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor open when he shuts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}I will fasten him securely,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a nail in a place that is firm.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Through him shall his father\uc1\u8217*s house
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be lifted to seats of honour.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Downfall of Eliakim\uc1\u8217*s Family

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}His family will hang upon him with all their weight \uc1\u8211* off-spring and off-scourings, all the meaner sort of vessels, be they bowls or be they pitchers. {\super\cf2\fs24 25}In that day, says the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts, shall the nail so firmly fastened be removed with a wrench, and down shall come in ruin all that had hung upon it: for the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts has spoken it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The fate of Phoenicia

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Elegy
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 23}Oracle on Tyre.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Wail, you ships of Tarshish:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Your haven is ruined.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
On your way from the island of Cyprus
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tale has been told you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The folk of the coast-land are perished,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the merchants of Sidon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who traversed the sea, and whose envoys
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
did sail many waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Whose harvest was wheat from the Nile,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and whose revenue trade with the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}O Sidon, you Mother of Cities,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you Stronghold of Ocean,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in shame take up this lament:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*The youths that with anguish I bore and brought up
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the maidens I reared, are no more.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}When tidings are come unto Egypt \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tidings of Tyre \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in sore pain shall they be.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Pass over to Tarshish, and wail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you that dwell on the coast-land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Is this your jubilant city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which dates from of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose feet in the olden time bore her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to settle afar?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Who then has purposed this doom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against Tyre, the crowned Queen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose merchants and traders were princes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
most honoured of earth?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}It\uc1\u8217*s the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts that has planned it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to desecrate pride,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to bring to contempt all splendour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all pomp of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Lament, you ships of Tarshish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your haven is gone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}He has stretched out His hand o\uc1\u8217*er the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has shaken the kingdoms.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} has charged touching Canaan
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to ruin her fortresses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Exult no more, you are ruined,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o daughter of Sidon.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Arise, and pass over to Cyprus \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there, too, you shall rest not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Howl, you ships of Tarshish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your haven is ruined.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Revival of Tyre

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}In that day Tyre shall pass into oblivion for seventy years, covering the period of one dynasty. At the end of seventy years, Tyre shall fare like the harlot in the song:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}With lyre in hand, walk up and down the city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
harlot, forgot by all:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Play skilfully, and sing them many ditty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that they may you recall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}But at the end of seventy years the {\scaps Lord} shall visit Tyre (with favour). She will resume her meretricious practices, selling herself to all the kingdoms of the {\super\cf2\fs24 18}world on the face of the earth. But her gains from this traffic shall be dedicated to the {\scaps Lord}: they shall not be stored or hoarded, but they are to belong to those who dwell in the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s presence; and these are to be furnished there from with abundance of food and stately apparel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Great World-Judgment

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Judgment: The Rebels Punished
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 24}Hark! soon will the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} empty
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and desolate the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Her semblance He will distort,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her inhabitants He will scatter.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Then the priest shall fare as the plain man,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the master shall fare as the servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the mistress as the maid.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The seller shall fare as the buyer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the borrower shall fare as the lender,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the creditor as the debtor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The earth shall be utterly emptied,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world shall be utterly spoiled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} has so decreed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The earth mourns and withers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world languishes and withers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
high heaven, like earth, languishes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The earth is all polluted
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beneath the people that tread it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for law they have transgressed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and statue overstepped,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have broken the eternal covenant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}So a curse has devoured the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it lights on her guilty people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the people of earth are scorched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and few are the men that are left.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7a}The new wine mourns, the wine languishes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11b}And Over the land is an outcry for wine;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7b}All merry hearts are sighing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8b}The tumult of gladness is silent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8a}Hushed us the mirth of the timbrel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8c}The mirth of the lute is hushed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}No more is there drinking of wine with singing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
strong drink is bitter to those that drink it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The City of Chaos is shattered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11a}The houses are bolted and barred;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11c}All merriment is over,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11d}And gladness is vanished from earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Desolation is left in the city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the gates are battered to ruins.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Few in the midst of the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be those that are left of the nations \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Few as the olives when beaten,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or grapes when the vintage is past.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Yonder they lift their voices
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in ringing shouts of joy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to the glorious the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They cry from over the sea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Now then you folk of the east,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give glory to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and you in the isles of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the name of Israel\uc1\u8217*s God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}From the uttermost parts of the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there float to us songs of praise:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Now glory has dawned for the righteous.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Ah misery, misery me,\uc1\u8217* said I,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*For the robbers are robbing and robbing still.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Trap, terror, and pit are before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you that dwell on the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}He that flies from the terror shall fall down the pit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he that creeps from the pit shall be caught in the trap.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the windows of heaven are opened,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and earth\uc1\u8217*s foundations tremble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}The earth is breaking asunder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the earth is splitting asunder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the earth is shaking asunder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The earth like a drunkard is reeling,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she sways to and fro like a hammock;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so heavy a guilt lies upon her \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she falls, to rise no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}That day the {\scaps Lord} shall punish
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the host of high heaven in the height,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the kings of the earth on the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}And swept shall they be a dungeon, like prisoners,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and pent in the prison long time they shall lie,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till the day of their punishment dawns.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Then the moon shall veil her face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the sun shall hide in shame;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts, enthroned
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in Jerusalem on Mount Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall manifest His glory
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the presence of His elders.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Banquet of the Nations on Mount Zion.
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 25}On this mountain the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall prepare for all the nations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a feast of pieces fat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a feast of wine on the less \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Fat pieces full of marrow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wine on the lees well strained.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He shall rend on this mountain the veil
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that enwrapped the face of all nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}He will swallow up death for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And then will swallow up death for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And then will the Lord the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Wipe tears from every face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and remove from off the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the reproach that has clung to His people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} Himself has decreed it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Security in the Great World-Judgment
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 26}O people of mine, come, enter your chambers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 20}and shut your doors behind you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and hide you but for a moment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till the wrath be overpast.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}For the {\scaps Lord}, behold! cometh forth from His place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to punish the dwellers on earth for their guilt;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the earth shall disclose her blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she shall cover her slain no more. 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 27}When that cometh, the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} shall punish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with His fierce and great and mighty sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
leviathan the fleeing serpent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Leviathan the coiled serpent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the great sea-monster He will slay.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}That day will the {\scaps Lord} beat out the grain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the river Euphrates to the torrent of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and {\i you} shall be gleaned, one by one, sons of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}That day, at the blast of a mighty trumpet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the men that were lost in the land of Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those that were outcast in Egypt\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall come and bow down to the {\scaps Lord} in worship
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the holy Mount in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Song of Thanksgiving over the Destruction of Some Proud City
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 25}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, You are my God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I exalt You, I praise Your name:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For a marvellous thing You have done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
long purposed, now come to fulfilment.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}You have made of a city a heap,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of a fortified city a ruin;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the palace of pride is a city no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it shall not be rebuilt for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For this shall fierce nations own Your glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the city of tyrants shall fear You.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For unto the weak You have proved You a stronghold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a stronghold wast You to the poor in his straits \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A refuge from storm and a shadow from heat.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}You subdues the voice of the proud,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you humblest the song of the tyrant.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Song over the Anticipated Destruction of Moab

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}That day it shall be said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold! this is our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for whom we have waited \uc1\u8211* to save us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
This is the {\scaps Lord} for whom we have waited,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o let us rejoice and be glad \uc1\u8211* He has saved us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For here upon this mountain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hand of the {\scaps Lord} shall rest;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and Moab shall be trampled
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the place whereon he stands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as straw in a dung-pit is trampled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Should he spread forth his hands.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Song of Gratitude and Hope

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jerusalem Secure: The Proud City Destroyed
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 26}In that say shall this song be snug in the land of Judah:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}A strong City is ours,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with bulwarks and walls
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that He sets for our safety.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Open the gates,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the righteous may enter
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who keeps the faith.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The mind that is steady
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you keeps in weal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for it trusts in You.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Trust in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Forevermore;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for Jah the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Is Rock of Ages.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For down He has cast
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the dwellers on high,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the towering city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
abasing it even to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and laying it low in the dust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The foot shall trample it \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the feet of the poor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the steps of the needy.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 It is Well with the Righteous, Ill with the Persistently Wicked

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The path of the upright is even,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you smoothest the way of the righteous.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}We have looked for You, O the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to come by Your pathway of judgment;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
we have yearned for a sign of Your presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which men may remember for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}I have yearned for You in the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, with passionate spirit have sought You.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When Your judgments come over the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those that dwell on the earth learn righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}No grace shall be shown to the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who righteousness will not learn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but even in the land of truth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
persist in their evil ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and are altogether blind
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the majesty of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Utter Destruction of the Enemy

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord}, Your hand is uplifted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but they are blind thereto;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may they see it, and be ashamed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let the fire, reserved for Your foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Your zeal for Your people consume them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}O the {\scaps Lord}, establish our welfare;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all that we have achieved
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has been wrought for us by You.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}O the {\scaps Lord} who are our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lords other than Thyself
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
have held us in their sway,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but {\i Your} name alone will we praise.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The dead shall not live again,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the shades shall not arise;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you have visited them with destruction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and blotted their memory clean.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Yet More Glorious Day

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}You have, O the {\scaps Lord}, increased the nation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
enlarged all the bounds of the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shown Thyself most glorious.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}In our straits, O the {\scaps Lord}, we sought You;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we cried, because we were crushed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your chastisement was upon us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}As a woman that is with child,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when she draws nigh her time,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
doth cry aloud in her pangs;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so were we, Lord, because of Your presence.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}For we, too, writhed in pangs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but we brought forth nothing but wind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
We achieved for the land no deliverance;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the denizens of the world
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fell not (in battle) before us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Your dead shall arise unto life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they that dwell in the dust shall awake,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and utter cries of joy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for a dew (from the regions) of light is Your dew,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth (refreshed thereby)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Shall quicken the shades into life.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Song of the Vineyard
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 27}In that day it shall be said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 2}Vineyard delightsome,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sing you of it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I am its guardian \uc1\u8211* the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
i water it moment by moment;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that no leaf of it shall fail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by day and by night I guard it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I cherish no anger against it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
But had I the briers and thorns,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
i would trample them down in the fray,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would burn them up altogether.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Else, then, let them seek My protection,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and let them make peace with Me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, peace let them make with Me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}That day shall Jacob take root,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
israel shall blossom and bud,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with fruit fill the face of the world.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Mercy to Israel

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Has (Israel) been smitten so sorely
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as those that smote {\i her} have been smitten?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Or has she been slain without remnant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as those that slew {\i her} have been slain?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}By dismissal and exile alone
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
doth (the {\scaps Lord}) contend with {\i her}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He has swept her away by His blast
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that blows fierce in the day of sirocco.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}On this condition therefore
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall Israel\uc1\u8217*s guilt be forgiven \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When she puts away her sin
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the issue thereof shall be this \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
That all the stones of her altars
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she shall grind, like chalk, to powder;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that sacred poles and sun-pillars
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she never shall raise again.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For the fortified city is desolate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a homestead forsaken, forlorn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like a pasture: there browses the calf \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there he lies, consuming the branches;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}And there, when the dry boughs are broken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
come women who use them for fuel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the people would not reflect;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and so from their Maker they win no pity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no favour from their Creator.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Warnings and Promises to Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Woe to Samaria
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 28}Woe to the coronet proud of the drunkards of Ephraim!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Woe to the fading flower of her glorious beauty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which crowns the heads of the men that are prostate with wine!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}See! the Lord has in readiness one that is mighty and strong \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a storm of hail, or like tempest destructive,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like storm of a mighty tempestuous flood \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that will bring her with violence down to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The coronet proud of the drunkards of Ephraim
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be trampled under foot;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And the fading flower of her glorious beauty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which crowned the head of the fertile valley,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall be as the first ripe fig before summer \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No sooner seen than swallowed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the moment it is in the hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But that day will the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto those that are left of His people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be Coronet lovely and Diadem fair \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}A spirit of justice to him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that presides over justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
of valour to those at the gate
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that stem the tide of war.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Scoffers of Jerusalem Threatened

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Isaiah\uc1\u8217*s Solemn Warning to the Drunken Priests and Prophets

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But here also men reel with wine
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stagger under drink;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yea, with drink reel prophet and priest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with wine they are utterly dazed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They reel in the hour of vision,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they totter in giving of judgment;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}All tables are full of vomit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and filth is everywhere.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*To whom does he mean to teach knowledge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and impart his revelation?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To children weaned from the milk,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to babes just drawn from the breast \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}With his law upon law, law upon law,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
saw upon saw, saw upon saw,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
here a little and there a little?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}(Well! thus I answer your mocking.)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Through barbarous lips and a foreign tongue
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will (the {\scaps Lord} now) speak to this people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For once had His message to you been this:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*The true rest in this \uc1\u8211* let the weary enjoy it:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And this is repose.\uc1\u8217* But you turned a deaf ear.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}So on this wise the {\scaps Lord} will speak to you now:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Law upon law, law upon law,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
saw upon saw, saw upon saw,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
here a little, and there a little\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To the end that you trip on your way and fall backward,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shattered and snared and taken.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Folly of the Egyptians Alliance

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Hear therefore the word of the {\scaps Lord}, you scoffers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who rule this folk in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Because you have said, \uc1\u8216*We are leagued with Death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with Sheol we are compact;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so the flood, though it passes in whelming torrents,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall never reach unto us;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for a lie we have made our refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we have sheltered ourselves behind falsehood\uc1\u8217*:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
behold! I am laying in Zion a stone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a tried and precious foundation stone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he that believeth shall not give way.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}And I will make justice the measuring-line,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and righteousness the plummet.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Then the refuge of lies shall swept by hail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the shelter deluged by water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Your league with Death shall be clean disannulled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your compact with Sheol shall no wise stand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When the flood swept on, it will trample you down;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
each time that it passes, \uc1\u8217*twill bear you away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}It shall pass every morning \uc1\u8211* by day and by night \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the word, grasped at last, shall bring nothing but terror.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}For the bed is too short for a man to stretch out in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the cover too narrow to wrap himself round.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}For the {\scaps Lord} shall rise as He rose on mount Perazim,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
blazing with wrath as in Gibeon\uc1\u8217*s vale,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to perform His task \uc1\u8211* that task so strange,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to accomplish His work \uc1\u8211* that work so.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Now scoff you no more, lest your bands become tighter;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for this have I heard from the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a decree of destruction o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Patience and Considerateness of the Divine Purpose

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Listen, and hear you my voice;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
attend and give ear to my speech.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Doth the ploughman keep ploughing for ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
keep opening and harrowing his ground?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Doth he not, after levelling its surface,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
scatter broadcast fennel and cummin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and plant there wheat and barley,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and, for its border, spelt?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}The {\scaps Lord} it is that has trained him aright,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his God it is that has taught him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Men thresh not fennel with sledges,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor are cart-wheels rolled over cummin;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but fennel is threshed with a staff,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cummin with a flail.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Do we ever crush bread-corn to pieces?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Nay, we do not keep threshing for ever;
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Character and Fate Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fate of Jerusalem
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 29}Woe to you, Ariel, Ariel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}city where David encamped.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let one or two years pass by,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a cycle of festivals more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}and distress I will bring upon Ariel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
moaning and lamentation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and you shall be Ariel indeed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I will camp, like David, against you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and circle there round with entrenchments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and set up forts against you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And low from the ground shall you speak,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your words from the dust shall rise humbly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with voice like a ghost\uc1\u8217*s from the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with twittering speech from the dust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But the horde of your foes shall become like fine dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the horde of the tyrants like flying chaff.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Then swiftly and suddenly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts will visit you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with thunder and with earthquake,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with din stupendous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with whirlwind and with tempest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and flame of devouring fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But the horde of all the nations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that fight against Ariel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with all their entrenchments and forts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the hosts that distress her,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be as a dream, as a vision of night.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Like a man that is hungry, who dreams that he eats
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wakes to find his desire unappeased;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like a man that is thirsty, who dreams that he drinks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wakes all faint, with his thirst unquenched:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Even so shall it be with the horde of all nations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that fight against Mount Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Spiritual Torpor and Religious Formality of the People

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Utterly dazed shall you be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
utterly blind shall you be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and drunken, though not with wine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
reeling, though not with strong drink.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For the {\scaps Lord} has poured upon you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a spirit of slumber deep;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the prophets, your eyes, He has sealed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the seers, your heads, He has covered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}so that the sight of all this is to you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the words on a scroll that is sealed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
If put into the hands of a scholar with the request that he read it, he will reply, \uc1\u8216*I cannot, it is sealed.\uc1\u8217* {\super\cf2\fs24 12}If, however, it be put into the hands of a man who is no scholar, with the request that he read it, he will reply, \uc1\u8216*I cannot, I am no scholar.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And the Lord said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Because these people praise me with words,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
honouring Me with their lips,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while their hearts are far away \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their religion only a mockery,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
formulate learned by rote \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I will deal with them therefore once more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in a fashion so wondrous strange
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that their wise men\uc1\u8217*s wisdom shall perish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their prudent men\uc1\u8217*s prudence shall vanish.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Woe to them who conceal
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord} their deep designs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
doing their deeds in the dark,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unseen, unperceived \uc1\u8211* so they think!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Doubters Rebuked by a Vision of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Welfare in the Latter Days

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}O perverse that you are!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Is the potter no more than the clay?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Shall the thing that is made maintain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that it has not been made by its maker?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Shall the thing that is fashioned deny
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the potter has understanding?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Soon Lebanon\uc1\u8217*s forests will become an orchard,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and orchards will be considered useless forest.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}In that day even the deaf
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall hear words read from a scroll,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and out of the gloom and darkness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the eyes of the blind shall see.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}And then shall the humble win
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a new joy in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the poorest shall exult
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}For the tyrant will have vanished,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the scoffer will have ceased;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and those that were zealous in sin
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall all have been rooted out,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}With those that have falsely condemned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sought to entrap the judge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and quibbled to injure the innocent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Thus therefore says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the God of the household of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Abraham\uc1\u8217*s redeemer:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No longer will Jacob be ashamed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no longer will faces grow pale with embarrasment.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}For the moment he beholds his children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what My hands have wrought in his midst,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall count My name as holy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the Holy One of Jacob
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they then shall count as holy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in awe hold the God of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Those that had erred in spirit
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall then win understanding;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and those that had grumbled
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will willingly learn the truth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Egyptian Alliance a Ruinous Policy

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Embassy to Egypt
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 30}Ha! you refractory sons, says the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that follow a purpose I did not inspire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and that make an alliance that {\i I} did not sanction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thus heaping sin upon sin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}They start on their journey to Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
without consulting Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to flee to the shelter of Pharaoh shall turn to your shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the shadow of Egypt shall prove your confusion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The princes encamp in Zoan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the envoys arrive at Hanes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}All of them laden with gifts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for a people that cannot avail them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that brings no help or profit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but only disgrace and shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Oracle concerning the beasts of the South.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Through a land of distress and hardship,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
of lioness and roaring lion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of viper and flying dragon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they carry their wealth on the backs of young asses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their treasures on humps of camels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to a people that cannot avail them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose help is vain and empty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}And therefore I name her Rahab,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the monster brought to silence.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Judah\uc1\u8217*s Rebellion and Ruin

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Now go and write it down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on a roll inscribe it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that it may be for the after-time,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a testimony for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For a rebel people are they,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sons that are utterly false,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
sons that refuse to listen
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the teaching of the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}That forbid the seers to see
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the prophets to prophesy truth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Speak to us smooth things,\uc1\u8217* they say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*And prophesy illusions.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Give over your wonted ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and leave your well-worn tracks;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and trouble us no more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the Holy One of Israel.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}This therefore is the message
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the Holy One of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Because you reject this word,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trust in guile and craft,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lean your weight thereon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}This guilt of yours shall be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a rift in a lofty wall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that bulges, ready to fall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
till suddenly and swiftly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
down it comes with a crash \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}A crash like that of a pitcher
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so ruthlessly dashed in pieces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that not a shred can be found
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
among the scattered fragments
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
wherewith to take fire from the heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or to draw from the cistern water.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Holy One of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*In calmly resting your safety lies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in quiet trust shall be your strength.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}But this you refused. You said \uc1\u8216*No;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but away we will speed upon horseback.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Yes, speed indeed you shall.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*On steeds that are swift we will ride.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Yes, and swift shall be they that pursue you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}At the menace of five you shall flee,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
until only a remnant be left,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like a pole on the top of a mountain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or a signal upon a hill.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Final Triumph and Prosperity of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Forgiveness and Prosperity

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Therefore the {\scaps Lord} length
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to show unto you His favour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and therefore He arises
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to reveal His pity upon you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} is God of justice:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Happy all who long for Him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}For, O people of Zion that dwell in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tears shall be yours no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will show you His gracious favour;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the (faintest) sound of your cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will answer you, soon as He hears it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}And though the Lord may give unto you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
scant measure of bread and scarceness of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet your Teacher no more shall withdraw,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but your eyes shall behold your Teacher.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}When you swerves to right of left,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall hear a voice behind you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*This is the way: walk here.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}And your images you shall defile \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whether carved and plated with silver,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or molten and covered with gold.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Like an unclean thing you shall scatter them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
saying to them, \uc1\u8216*Begone.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Rain shall He give for your seed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wherewith you sow the ground;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the wheat that springs from the ground
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall rich and abundant be.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In that day shall your cattle
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
graze over pastures broad.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}The oxen and asses that till the ground
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall feast upon salted provender,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that with shovel and fork has been winnowed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}On every lofty mountain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on every hill that is high,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall be streams of running water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the day of vast slaughter and falling towers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}And the moonlight shall be as the sunlight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the sun shall be sevenfold brighter than now,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in the day that the {\scaps Lord} upbinds
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hurt of His people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and heals the wound that has smitten them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Glorious Triumph

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Behold, the {\scaps Lord} comes from afar
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in thick rising clouds and with anger that blazes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with lips that are filled with rage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tongue like devouring fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}With breadth like a rushing torrent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that reaches even to the neck,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to sift till the nations are sifted to nothing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to bridle their jaws and to lead them to ruin.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Then a song you shall sing like the song
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the night of a holy festival;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and gladness of heart shall be yours,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as is his, who, to sound of flute,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
sets forth for the Mount of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to (worship) the Rock of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}The {\scaps Lord} will utter His glorious voice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will bring down His arm in the sight of all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in furious indignation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and flame of devouring fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in cloud-burst and rain-storm and hailstones.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}At the thunder-voice of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when He smiles with the rod,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall Assyria be stricken with terror.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}And each stroke of the rod of destiny,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the {\scaps Lord} lays upon him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall fall to the music of timbrel and lute;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with brandished arm shall He fight against them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}For already a pyre is prepared,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
constructed wide and deep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
piled high with blazing wood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fired by the breath of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as by a stream of brimstone.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Folly of the Egyptian Alliance
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 31}Woe to those that journey
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}to the land of Egypt for help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who rely on the throngs of her horses and chariots,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trust in the eminent strength of her horsemen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but never turn their eyes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the Holy One of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ask not the {\scaps Lord} for counsel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Yet He too is wise, and He brings disaster;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his threats He has not recalled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will rise to contend with the household of miscreants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with those whom the wicked would summon to help them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The people of Egypt are men, not God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their horses are flesh, not spirit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let therefore the {\scaps Lord} but stretch forth His hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the helper will stumble, the holpen will fall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and both shall perish together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For thus has the {\scaps Lord} declared to me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Like as a lion growls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or a young lion over his prey,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when against him the shepherds are summoned
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to come in all their strength \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
At the shout he is undismayed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at their noise he is nothing daunted \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts shall come down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to fight against Mount Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and against the hill thereof;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then like fluttering birds (shall they flee).
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Thus will the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
throw His shield around Jerusalem;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he will shield her and deliver her,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will spare her and bring her to safety.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Enemy\uc1\u8217*s Downfall

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}O turn, you men of Israel, to Him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom deeply you have offended.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In that day each will disdain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the gold and silver idols
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his guilty hands have made.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Assyria shall fall by no mortal sword;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a sword, but not man\uc1\u8217*s, shall devour him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From the face of that sword he shall flee,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his youths shall be put to task-work.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}In his fear he will flee past his rocky retreat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his princes shall run from the standard in panic.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Thus says the {\scaps Lord} whose fire is in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose furnace is in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Rulers and People in the Coming Days
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 32}Behold there cometh a King
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}who shall rule in a spirit of justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and princes who govern with equity \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Each like a shelter from the wind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a refuge from storm of rain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
or like streamlets of water in dry parched places,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or shade of great rock in a weary land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Then the eyes that see shall not be sealed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the ears that hear shall not be heedless;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The mind of the rash shall judge with discernment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the stammering tongue shall be fluent and plain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}No more shall a fool be called \uc1\u8216*noble,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
No more shall a knave be named \uc1\u8216*princely.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For the fool speaks folly for ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his mind evermore plots mischief;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
his doings are profane,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and error he speaks of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He leaves the hungry unsated,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and drink he withholds from the thirsty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The tricks of the evil are vile,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and villainies he plans \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To ruin the humble with lies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the poor, though his plea may be just.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But the plans of the \uc1\u8216*noble\uc1\u8217* are noble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by nobleness shall he endure.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Warning to the Women

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You women that are at ease,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
arise and hear my voice;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you carelessly confident daughters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give ear to what I say.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}In little more than a year
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall shudder, for all your confidence;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the vintage shall surely fail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the fruit shall not be garnered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Tremble, you women at ease,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you that are confident, shudder;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
strip you, and make you bare,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
gird (sackcloth) upon your loins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}And beat upon your breasts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in lament for the pleasant fields,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and for the fruitful vines,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And for the land of my people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
overgrown with thorns and briers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Not a house of mirth shall be left
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in all the jubilant city.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The palace shall be forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the thronging city deserted;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
watchtower and hill shall become
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
an everlasting waste.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Security and Prosperity of the Coming Days

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}But yet from the heavenly height
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall a spirit be poured upon us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the desert become like a garden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the garden be counted a forest.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Then justice shall dwell in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and righteousness live in the garden-land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Of justice the fruit shall be peace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the outcome of righteousness safety
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and quietness for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}My people shall dwell in the mansion of peace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the easeful rest in abodes secure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}The forest shall be felled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the city laid utterly low.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Happy are you that may sow
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in a land that is all well watered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where oxen and asses may roam.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Present Distress and the Future Glory of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Distress
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 33}Woe to you, spoiler, whom none has despoiled;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}you treacherous robber, whom no one has robbed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When your spoiling is over, you too shall be spoiled;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when your robbing is ended, you too shall be robbed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}O the {\scaps Lord}, be gracious to us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we have waited for You;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
be You our Arm every morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our Saviour in time of distress.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}At the sound od the tumult the peoples are fled;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you lift Yourself, and the nations are scattered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}(Your folk), like the locusts, shall gather the booty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
over it swarming, as grasshoppers swarm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The Lord is exalted, He dwells on high;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with justice and righteousness Zion He fills,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}With wealth of salvation and wisdom and knowledge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with treasure that flows the fear of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The heroes of Ariel are crying without,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the envoys of peace shed bitter tears;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Forlorn are the highways, the wayfarer ceases.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He has broken the compact and mocked at its witnesses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
utterly reckless of human kind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The earth mourns and languishes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lebanon withers in shame:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Sharon is now like a desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Bashan and Carmel are leafless.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}But thus says the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*Now {\i I} will arise;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea now, even now, I will lift Me on high.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You are pregnant with chaff, and your child shall be stubble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my breath shall devour you like fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The nations shall sink through the burning ashes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a thorns cut away, that are kindled with fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The men of far countries shall hear of My doings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those that are near shall acknowledge My might.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The sinners in Zion are filled with terror,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shuddering seizes the souls profane.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*O who can dwell with devouring fire?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who cab dwell with eternal flame?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Who walks in righteousness, speaks with honesty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
scorns the gain that is won by oppression;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose hand refuses to clutch at a bribe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who stops his ears at a tale of blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who closes his eyes at the sight of evil:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}He it is that shall dwell on impregnable heights.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
On a fastness of rock shall his stronghold be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where his bread is provided, his water is sure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Thine eyes shall behold the King in His beauty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall look on the land that stretches afar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}And thus shall you muse on the (vanished) terror:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Where is he that once weighed, that once counted the tribute,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he that once counted the towers (for assault)?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}No more shall you look on the insolent people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the people of dark and difficult speech,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who chatter a barbarous, meaningless tongue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Look on the city of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the home of our festal assemblies;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
thine eyes shall behold Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as a home of ease, a tent unremoved,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose pegs shall never be plucked from the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and not one of whose cords shall be snapped asunder.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}In place of broad encompassing streams
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be there for our comfort the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own river,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a river where sails no fleet with oars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stately galleys pass not over.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For the {\scaps Lord} Himself is our Judge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} Himself is our Marshall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} Himself is our King:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is He, He alone, that shall save us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23d}Then shall the blind divide spoil in abundance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23e}And then shall rich plunder be seized by the lame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Nevermore shall inhabitants say, \uc1\u8216*I am sick,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
For the sins of her people are all forgiven.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Golden Age

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Day of Vengeance

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Destruction of the Nations
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 34}Draw nigh, you nations, and hearken;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}you peoples, give attention.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let the earth and its fullness hearken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world and all its offspring.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For the {\scaps Lord} is wroth with all nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and angry with all their host;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he has doomed them to destruction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has given them up to slaughter.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Their slain shall be flung out,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a stench shall arise from their corpses;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the mountains shall run with their blood,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The heavens shall roll up like a scroll,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all their host shall fade \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
As the leaves fade away from the vine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the foliage fades from the fig-tree.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Destruction of Edom

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For already drunk with His wrath
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the sword of the {\scaps Lord} in heaven.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
See! down it descends upon Edom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in doom on that people accursed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Blood-gorged is the sword of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is smeared all over with fat
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with the blood of lambs and of goats,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the fat of the kidneys of rams.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord} has a sacrifice in Bozrah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
vast slaughter in Edom\uc1\u8217*s land:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}With those shall be struck down wild oxen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bullocks together with steers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Their land shall be drunken with blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their dust shall be smeared with fat;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For the {\scaps Lord} has set Him a day of revenge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the Champion of Zion a year of requital.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Her streams shall be turned into pitch,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the dust of the land into brimstone;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
her land shall be turned into pitch,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that burns night and day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}It shall not be quenched for ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her smoke shall go up through the ages;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a waste she shall lie evermore,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be crossed by no traveller for ever \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The haunt of the pelican and bittern,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the home of the owl and the raven:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} will stretch out upon her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the measuring-line of Chaos,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the plums of Destruction.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Satyrs shall dwell therein,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her nobles shall cease to be;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
no kingdom shall there be proclaimed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and her princes shall be no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Where her palaces were, shall spring thorns;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in her fortresses, nettles and thistles.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A haunt shall she be for jackals,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a place for the camping of ostriches.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}wild cats shall join the hyenas,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and satyrs shall meet with their fellows;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
there only the night-hag reposes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and finds her place of rest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}There the arrow-snake nestles and lays,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there she broods and hatches her eggs;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
there only the vultures gather \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one without its mate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Search in the Book of the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one of all these is missing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own lips have commanded,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and His is the breath that has gathered them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 17}He} has assigned it by lot to them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his is the hand that apportioned it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as their everlasting possession,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their home through all the ages.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Joy of the Redeemed
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 35}Let the desert and parched land rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}let the steppe-land exult and burst forth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let it burst into bloom like narcissus,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ring with glad cries of rejoicing,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}All dowered with the glory of Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the splendour of Carmel and Sharon:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall witness the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the majesty of our God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Strengthen the hands that hang down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the tottering knees make firm;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Tell you the wild-beating hearts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be strong and unafraid.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold! your God is coming,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will surely avenge His people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
god is coming in retribution,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he Himself is coming to save you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the ears of the deaf unstopped;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Then the lame shall leap like a hart
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the tongue of the dumb shall sing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For waters break out in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and torrents in the wilderness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The parched land becomes a pool,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the thirsty land springs of water.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In the haunts of (wild cats and of) jackals
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
(Your flocks and your herds) shall rest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the court (where the ostriches camp)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Shall be filled with reeds and rushes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}And there a pure highway shall rise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be called \uc1\u8216*The Holy Way\uc1\u8217*;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the unclean shall not pass over it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fools shall not wander therein.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}No lion shall be there,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no ravenous beast shall ascend it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but there shall the ransomed walk,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s redeemed shall come home.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}They shall come unto Zion with singing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and crowned with unending joy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for at last joy and gladness have found them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sorrow and sighing are fled.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Historical Appendix

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Isaiah Encourages Hezekiah to Resist Sennacheirb\uc1\u8217*s Summons to Surrender Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 First Narrative
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 36}In the fourteenth year of the reign of Hezekiah, Sennacherib, King of Assyria, after having assaulted and captured all the fortified cities of Judah, {\super\cf2\fs24 2}despatched his Chief Officer from Lachish with a large force against King Hezekiah in Jerusalem. Near the conduit of the upper pool, where he had taken up his position on the Fuller\uc1\u8217*s Field Road, {\super\cf2\fs24 3}he was visited by a deputation consisting of Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, Governor of the Palace, Shebna the Secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the Recorder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The Chief Officer began: \uc1\u8216*This is the message from the Great King, the King of Assyria: I desire {\super\cf2\fs24 5}you to deliver it to Hezekiah. \uc1\u8217*What sort of confidence is this that you cherish? Do you imagine that in war a mere word of the lips is the equivalent of wisdom and strength? Now who is it you are {\super\cf2\fs24 6}trusting in, that you presume to rebel against me? Of course you are trusting to Egypt, that staff of broken reed, which will enter and piece the hand of the man that leans upon it: that is all that Pharaoh King of Egypt will prove to those who {\super\cf2\fs24 7}trust to him. If, however, you tell me you are trusting to your God the {\scaps Lord}, why, that is the very god whose sanctuaries and altars Hezekiah has abolished, commanding the people of Judah and Jerusalem to confine their worship to the altar at this {\super\cf2\fs24 8}place? Now, make a wager, if you like, with my lord the King of Assyria: I am prepared to furnish you with two thousand horses, if you on your part {\super\cf2\fs24 9}can supply them with riders. (But if you cannot), how do you propose to repel the onset of one of the least of my lord\uc1\u8217*s officers? yet you trust to Egypt {\super\cf2\fs24 10}for chariots and horsemen. And now do you imagine that I have not the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s sanction for invading this land with a view to its destruction? Why, it is the {\scaps Lord} Himself who commissioned me to invade this land and destroy it.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Thereupon Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah asked the Chief Officer to be good enough not to speak to them in Hebrew, in the hearing of the people on the wall, but in Aramaic, which they assured him {\super\cf2\fs24 12}they understood. \uc1\u8216*Nay,\uc1\u8217* replied the Officer, \uc1\u8216*it is not to your lord and yourself that my lord has sent me with this message, but precisely to the men on the wall, whom your policy is likely to reduce to eating their own filth and drinking their own water. \uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Then the Chief Officer came forward and cried aloud in Hebrew, \uc1\u8216*Listen to the words of the {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Great King, the King of Assyria. Thus says the King: Do not let yourselves be imposed upon by {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Hezekiah, for he is powerless to deliver you; and do not let yourselves be induced to trust to the {\scaps Lord} by Hezekiah\uc1\u8217*s assurances that the {\scaps Lord} will unquestionably save you, and that this city will not be delivered into the hands of the King of Assyria. {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Give no heed to Hezekiah; for thus says the King of Assyria to you, Make your peace with me and surrender, and then everyone shall eat of his own vine and fig-tree, and drink water from his own {\super\cf2\fs24 17}cistern, till I come and take you to a land like your own \uc1\u8211* a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and {\super\cf2\fs24 18}vineyards. Do not let Hezekiah delude you with assurances that the {\scaps Lord} will save you. Has the god of any nation ever rescued his land from the grasp {\super\cf2\fs24 19}of the King of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods Sepharvain? And where are the gods of the land of Samaria? Have they rescued Samaria from {\super\cf2\fs24 20}his grasp? Which of all these national gods has succeeded in rescuing his land from my grasp, that the {\scaps Lord} should now rescue Jerusalem from my {\super\cf2\fs24 21}grasp?\uc1\u8217* To this they answered not a word, they remained silent; for the King had expressly told {\super\cf2\fs24 22}them not to answer him. Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, Governor of the Palace, and Shebna the Secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the Recorder, tore their garments, and returned to Hezekiah, telling him what the Chief Officer had said. 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 37}When King Hezekiah heard this, he tore his garments, covered himself with sackcloth, and went {\super\cf2\fs24 2}into the Temple; and he despatched Eliakim, Governor of the Palace, and Shebna the Secretary, and the elders of the priests, all covered with sackcloth, {\super\cf2\fs24 3}to the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, to whom they spoke as follows: \uc1\u8216*A message from Hezekiah! This is a day of trouble, chastisement, and disgrace: for children are come to the birth, {\super\cf2\fs24 4}and there is not strength to bear them. But it may be that the {\scaps Lord} your God will hear the words of the Chief Officer, whom the King of Assyria, his master, has sent to insult the living God, and will punish the word which the {\scaps Lord} your God has heard: so lift up {\super\cf2\fs24 5,6}your prayer for those that remain.\uc1\u8217* And this was the answer that Isaiah returned to the deputation of King Hezekiah\uc1\u8217*s ministers: \uc1\u8216*Tell your master,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*that the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message to him is this: he is not to be afraid of the blasphemous words he has heard from the minions of the King of Assyria. {\super\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8217* Behold,\uc1\u8217* says He, \uc1\u8217*I will inspire him with such a spirit (of panic) that on the strength of a rumour he will return to this own land, and there, in his own land, I will cause him to fall a victim to the sword.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Then the Chief Officer returned and found the King of Assyria engaged in the siege of Libnah, for he had heard that he had moved his camp from Lachish. {\super\cf2\fs24 9a}When the news reached him that Tirhakah King of Ethiopia was advancing to give him battle \uc1\u8230*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
So Sennacherib, King of Assyria, broke up camp and returned to Nineveh, where he settled. Subsequently, as he was worshipping in the temple of Nisroch his god, he was assassinated by his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer. They, however, made good their escape to Armenia, and he was succeeded by Esar-haddon his son.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Second Narrative

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9b}Then he sent messengers to Hezekiah with the {\super\cf2\fs24 10}following instructions. \uc1\u8216*This,\uc1\u8217* said he, \uc1\u8216*is what you are to say to Hezekiah King of Judah, {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Do not let the god you trust in delude you with his assurance that Jerusalem will not be delivered into the hands of the King of Assyria. You are well aware of the ruin the King of Assyria has brought upon all lands, and are {\i you} to escape? {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Were the nations which my father destroyed saved by their gods \uc1\u8211* Gozan and Haran and Rezeph and the {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Edenites in Telassar? Where is the King of Hamath and the King of Arpad and the King of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena and Ivvah?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Hezekiah received the letter at the hands of the messengers and read it; then he went up to the {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Temple and spread it before the {\scaps Lord}, and to {\super\cf2\fs24 16}the {\scaps Lord} thus he prayed: \uc1\u8216*O the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts, You God is Israel, enthroned upon the cherubim, You are God alone over all the kingdoms of the earth: You are the Creator of heaven and earth. {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Incline Thine ear, O the {\scaps Lord}, and hear; open Thine eyes, O the {\scaps Lord}, and see; and hear the message of Sennacherib which he has sent to insult {\super\cf2\fs24 18}the living God. True it is, O the {\scaps Lord}, that the Kings of Assyria have devoted all nations and {\super\cf2\fs24 19}their lands to destruction, and thrust their gods in the fire, for no gods were they at all, but wood and stone, fashioned by human hands and so they were {\super\cf2\fs24 20}destroyed. But now, O the {\scaps Lord} our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that You alone, O the {\scaps Lord}, are God.\uc1\u8217* {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent this answer back to Hezekiah: \uc1\u8216*Thus says the {\scaps Lord} the God of Israel: I have heard your prayer concerning Sennacherib, King of Assyria. {\super\cf2\fs24 22}This is the word of the {\scaps Lord} concerning him:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The virgin, the daughter of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
contemns you and mocks you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
behind you Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s daughter
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is shaking her head.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Against whom have you lifted your voice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in reviling and blasphemy?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, your eyes you have lifted to heaven
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}You have reviled, by your minions,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Lord, and have said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*With my chariots I climb the high hills,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the recesses of Lebanon;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
her towering cedars I fell,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and her cypresses choice;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and I pierce to her furthest retreat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where the forest is thickest.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Wells, too, (in the desert) I dig,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I drink of strange waters;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with the sole of my foot I dry up
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the Nile-streams of Egypt.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Hast you not heard that all this
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I prepared long ago?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From the old I had planned it, and now
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have brought it to pass:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So \uc1\u8217*tis your to lay fortified cities
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in desolate heaps.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Their inhabitants, impotent all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are dismayed and confounded,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
become like the grass of the field,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the green tender grass;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they are like unto grass on the roofs
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the east wind has blasted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Your sitting and rising I know,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your going and coming;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Your raging and uproar against Me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are come to Mine ears.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So My ring I will put through your nose
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and My bit in your lips,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and (thus led) I will make you return
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by the way that you came.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}And the sign unto you shall be this:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
This year you shall eat that which grows of itself,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the next that which springs therefrom;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but the third you shall sow and reap,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
plant vineyards and eat of their fruit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}And those that escape of the household of Judah
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall again take root downward, and upward bear fruit;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and forth from Mount Zion all such as escape.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The zeal of the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall bring this thing to pass.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}Therefore thus says the {\scaps Lord} concerning the King of Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he shall not come into this city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor shoot an arrow there;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he shall not come before it with shield,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor cast up a mound against it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}But back he shall go by the way that he came,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and into this city he shall not enter;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}For I will protect and deliver this city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for Mine own sake and David My servant\uc1\u8217*s sake.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}Then the angel of the {\scaps Lord} went forth and slew in the camp of Assyria one hundred and eighty-five thousand men: when they rose in the morning, behold! every man was a lifeless corpse.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Hezekiah\uc1\u8217*s Sickness, Recovery, and Song of Thanksgiving

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Hezekiah\uc1\u8217*s Sickness
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 38}In those days Hezekiah was seized with a mortal sickness: and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him and said, \uc1\u8216*the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} commands you to set your household affairs in order; for you will {\super\cf2\fs24 2}not recover, you are to die.\uc1\u8217* Then, turning his face to the wall, Hezekiah offered this prayer to {\super\cf2\fs24 3}the {\scaps Lord}: \uc1\u8216*Remember, O the {\scaps Lord}, I beseech You, how I have lived in Your presence with a faithful and undivided heart, and done the thing that pleased You.\uc1\u8217* And Hezekiah wept bitterly. Then {\super\cf2\fs24 4}there came to Isaiah this message from the {\scaps Lord}, {\super\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Go and say to Hezekiah: This says the {\scaps Lord}, the God of David your father, \uc1\u8217*I will add to your life fifteen {\super\cf2\fs24 6}years more. You and this city together I will rescue from the grasp of the King of Assyria, and {\super\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Take this,\uc1\u8217* he replied, \uc1\u8216*as a sign from the {\scaps Lord} {\super\cf2\fs24 8}that He will do what He has promised. Watch the shadow that the descending sun has cast on the step-clock of Ahaz: I will bring that shadow ten steps backward.\uc1\u8217* and the sun did indeed go back on the step-clock the ten steps it had gone down.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Hezekiah\uc1\u8217*s Song of Thanksgiving

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}A psalm of Hezekiah King of Judah, to celebrate his recovery from the sickness which had overtaken him:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Me thought I was doomed to depart
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when my life was at noon-tide \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Consigned to the portals of Sheol
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the rest of my years.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I had thought to see Jah nevermore
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the land of the living,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and never again to behold
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
any man in this world.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Like the tent of a shepherd, my home
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is plucked up and stripped from me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he has rolled up my life like a web,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the thrum He has cut me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To pain I am doomed night and day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And I cry till the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
while all my bones, like a lion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he crushes in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I scream as screams a swift,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a dove do I moan;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
mine eyes look tearfully heavenward:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O think on me, Lord, be my surety.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}What can I utter or say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
since \uc1\u8217*tis He has done it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I toss all the time of my slumber \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my soul is so bitter.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}O rest You my spirit, refresh me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and let me recover.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}"Tis You that have kept my soul
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the pit of destruction.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behind Your back You have cast
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mine iniquities all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}For Sheol can give You no thanks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor can Death sing Your praises;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and they that go down to the pit
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cannot hope for Your love.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}It is the living, the living, that praise You,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as I do this day.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So the father shall tell to his sons
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of Your faithfulness sure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Be pleased, O the {\scaps Lord}, to save us:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Then all the days of our life
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
we shall play upon instruments stringed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in front of the house of the {\scaps Lord}. {\super\cf2\fs24 21}this city I will protect.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8217* Then Isaiah said, \uc1\u8216*Let them take a cake of figs and press it on the boil, to {\super\cf2\fs24 22}ensure his recovery.\uc1\u8217* And Hezekiah said, \uc1\u8216*What is the sign that I shall yet go up to the Temple?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Hezekiah\uc1\u8217*s Vanity and Isaiah\uc1\u8217*s Rebuke
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 39}At that time, Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, King of Babylon, having heard that Hezekiah had been ill and had recovered, despatched {\super\cf2\fs24 2}eunuchs to him with a present. Hezekiah, delighted, proceeded to display to them his treasure- house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the fine oil, the armoury, and the whole range of his treasures: there was nothing in his place or indeed in all his dominion that Hezekiah did not show them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Then came the prophet Isaiah to King Hezekiah and said, \uc1\u8216*Where do these men come from, and what have they said?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*They have come,\uc1\u8217* said Hezekiah, \uc1\u8216*from a distant land, from Babylon.\uc1\u8217* {\super\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*What have they seen in your palace?\uc1\u8217* said Isaiah; and Hezekiah answered, \uc1\u8216*Everything: there is none of my treasures that I have not shown them.\uc1\u8217* {\super\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Listen, then,\uc1\u8217* said Isaiah, \uc1\u8216*to the word of the {\scaps Lord} {\super\cf2\fs24 6}of Hosts. Mark, the day is coming, when all that is in your palace, and all the treasures that you ancestors have hither to amassed, shall be carried to {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Babylon: nothing shall be left, says the {\scaps Lord}. And of the sons that may yet be born to you, some shall be taken to become eunuchs is the palace of the {\super\cf2\fs24 8}King of Babylon.\uc1\u8217* Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, \uc1\u8216*I accept the word of the {\scaps Lord} which you have spoken.\uc1\u8217* At least, thought he, there will be peace and stability in my day.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Exiles\uc1\u8217* Book of Consolation

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord the Omnipotent is About to Usher in the day of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord is the Lord of Nature and History

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Glorious News \uc1\u8211* Redemption is Nigh
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 40}\uc1\u8216*Comfort you, comfort My people,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Declares your God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Speak home to the heart of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cry unto her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that her time of sore service is over,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her guilt is discharged;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for her sins she has doubly atoned
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the hand of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Hark! Says a voice, \uc1\u8216*In the wilderness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
clear you a way for the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
make you straight in the desert
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a highway for our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Let every valley be raised,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
every mountain and hill brought low;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let the steep rugged ground become level,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the rough rocky ridges a plain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then the {\scaps Lord} shall show forth His glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all fresh shall see it together:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The mouth of the {\scaps Lord} has spoken it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Hark! Says a voice, \uc1\u8216*Proclaim.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*What shall I proclaim?\uc1\u8217* said I.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Proclaim that all flesh is grass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all its grace as the flower of the field.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The grass withers, the flower fades,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when upon it the breath of the {\scaps Lord} has blown.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Yea, the grass withers, the flower fades;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the word of our God shall stand for ever.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Get you up to a mountain high,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you that tallest good tidings to Zion;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lift up your voice with strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you that brings good news to Jerusalem;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lift it up, be not afraid.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Say to the cities of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Yonder cometh your God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}See! the {\scaps Lord} is coming in might,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with an arm that ensures His dominion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold, His reward is with Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his recompense is before Him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}He feeds His flock like a shepherd,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he gathered it with His arm;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he carries the lambs in His bosom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those that give suck He leads.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Sovereignty and Omnipotence of God as Seen in Nature

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who has ruled off the heavens with a span,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
comprehend the dust of the earth in a measure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and weighed the mountains in scales,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the hills in a balance?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Who has directed the mind \uc1\u8216* \uc1\u8217*of the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And where is the counsellor that taught Him?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Whom did He ask for enlightenment?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who taught Him the pathway of right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or showed Him the way of true insight?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}See! nations are nought but a drop on a bucket,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they count but as dust on a balance;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he lifted the isles like a mote.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Too small for the fires (of His altars) is Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
too few are its breasts for an offering.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}All nations are nothing before Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he counts them but empty nothing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}So to whom will you liken God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or what likeness set over against Him?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}An imagine! A craftsman has cast it, 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\cf1 41}A goldsmith o\uc1\u8217*erlaid it with gold.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Each workman helps his fellow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and says to his neighbour, \uc1\u8216*Set to.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}So the craftsman heartens the goldsmith,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the polisher says to the finisher,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Fine piece of soldering that!\uc1\u8217* 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\cf1 40}Then the nails down the statue securely.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}And he would carve a wood image
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
makes choice of a wood that decays not;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then he seeks a craftsman of skill,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to erect for him an image,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that is warranted not to topple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}But know you not then of yourselves, or from hearsay?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Has this from the first not been told you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Of this have you not been aware,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
since the day that the world was founded?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}It is He that sits throned on the vault of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so high that the dwellers thereon are like locusts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that stretches the heavens across like a veil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}It is He that reduces proud princes to nothing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that turns the rulers of earth into nothing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Scarce are they planted, and scarce are they sown,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and scarce has their stock then root in the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when He blows upon them, and so they wither:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The whirlwind bears them away like chaff.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}To whom will you liken Me, then?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And who is My match? says the Holy One.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Lift up your eyes on high;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
see! who has created all those?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He who brings their host out by number,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and summons each by his name:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So great His resource and so mighty His power
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that not one of them fails to answer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Why say you, then, O Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel, why maintain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that your lot is unknown to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your right ignored by your God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Know you not of yourself or by hearsay \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} is God eternal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
creator of all the earth?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He faints not, neither is weary,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unsearchable is His wisdom;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 29}He} gives power to the weary,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and increase of strength to the feeble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}Youths may faint and grow weary,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and young men may stumble and fall;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}But those that wait for the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Shall find their strength renewed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall put forth pinions like eagles.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall run, and not grow weary;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall walk, and not be faint.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Sovereignty of God as Seen in History, and Especially in the Rise of Cyrus

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Rise of Cyrus a Proof of the 
{\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s Power 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 41}Hearken in silence, you coast-lands, to Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and await, you nations, Mine argument:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Come hither, then state your case;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so let us approach the tribunal together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Who raised up him from the east land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose steps are attended by victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
sweeping the nations before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and laying king low at his feet?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His sword makes them like dust
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his bow like the driven stubble;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He pursues and passes unharmed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor touches the ground with his feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Who is He has wrought and accomplished this?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is He that from the beginning
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
did summon the generations \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Even I, the {\scaps Lord}, the First,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with Last am I.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The coast-lands have seen it and feared,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the ends of the earth fell a-trembling,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they came and drew nigh (to the judgment).
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Israel is the 
{\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s Servant, Loved and Upheld by Him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But you, Israel My Servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
jacob, whom I have chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the offspring of Abraham My friend;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Whom I fetched from the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and called from the corners thereof,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with the words, \uc1\u8216*My servant are you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have chosen, and not since rejected you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
My victorious hand will uphold you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}See! all that are furious against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall end in shame and confusion;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the men that contended against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall pass into nothing and perish.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The men that have striven against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you never shall find, though you seek them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the men that are warring against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall wholly and utterly vanish.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} says, I am your helper;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your Redeemer is Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}A threshing-sledge, see! I will make of you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
new and well-furnished with teeth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you shall thresh the mountains to powder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hills you shall make like chaff.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The wind, when you winnow, shall scatter them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the whirlwind shall bear them away;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but you shall rejoice in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and glory in Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The poor who seek water where water is none,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the needy whose tongue is parched with thirst \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I, the {\scaps Lord}, will hear their prayer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
i, who am Israel\uc1\u8217*s God, will not leave them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}But streams on the hills I will open,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and springs in the midst of the valleys;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the will I turn into pools od water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the land that is parched into fountains of water.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}I will plant in the desert the cedar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
acacia, myrtle, and olive;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will set in the wilderness fir-trees,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the plane and the cypress together:
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 No Heathen God Can Predict the Future

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Now then, says the {\scaps Lord}, bring forward your suit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
produce your idols, says Jacob\uc1\u8217*s King.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Let them come and declare unto us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the things that are yet to happen;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
declare how the past was foretold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that we may give thought thereto.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Or announce what is yet to come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that we may mark the issue;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Declare what shall be hereafter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and then we shall know you are gods.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, do aught that you please, good or ill,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that may strike us with awe to behold.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Now see, you are nothing, and nought can you do:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Hateful is he that chooses you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 No Heathen God, but the 
{\scaps Lord} Alone, Predicted the Advent of Cyrus
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}I have roused up one from the north, he is come \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even one from the sunrise who calls on My name;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he shall trample on princes like mortar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as potter tramples the clay.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Bur who from the first has announced this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that so we might recognize it?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Or who has aforetime declared it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that now we must own to its truth?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
There was none that announced or declared it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one heard a word from {\i you}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}It was I who first told it to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gave the glad news to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}I looked all around \uc1\u8211* there was no one;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one of the gods could give counsel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or answer, to taught that I asked them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}See! one and all they are nothing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and nothing can they do:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Their idols are wind and waste.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Servant (Israel), his Task and Destiny

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Servant\uc1\u8217*s Task
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 42}Behold!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}My Servant, whom I uphold;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my Chosen, the joy of My soul.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I have put My spirit upon him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he shall publish (My) Law to the nations.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}He shall not cry, nor shout,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor utter his voice in the streets;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Not a reed that is bent shall he break,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor a wick that burns dim shall he quench.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He shall faithfully set forth (My) Law,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}All erect and aglow shall he be:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He shall yet set (My) Law in the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the islands shall wait for his teaching.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Thus says the {\scaps Lord}, the God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who spread out and stretched forth the heavens;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who created the earth and its fruits,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
giving breath to the people upon it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spirit to them that tread it:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}With full and deliberate purpose
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have I the {\scaps Lord} called you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and taken your hand in Mine;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I formed you as pledge and symbol
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of My covenant with mankind \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A light to enlighten the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}To open the eyes of the blind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and to bring from the dungeon the captives
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who sit in the darkness of prison.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I am the (true) God, the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
this is the name that is Mine:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And My glory I yield to no other,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my praise shall no image enjoy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Behold, the predictions of old are fulfilled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and new things I now declare;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
before they spring into being,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I make them know unto you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The New Song

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Sing a new song to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his praise form the end of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let the sea and its fullness roar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the islands and those that dwell there.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Let the desert rejoice with her cities,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the villages Kedar inhabits;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let Sela\uc1\u8217*s inhabitants sing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let them shout from the top of the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Let them give to the {\scaps Lord} glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tell forth His praise in the islands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} goes forth like a hero,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he stirs His rage like a warrior;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he shouts His fierce battle-cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he engages His foes like a hero.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord at last Bestirs Himself

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Long time have I held My peace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and restrained Myself in silence;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but now, like a woman in travail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I groan, I pant and gasp.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Mountains and hills I will waste,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will dry up all their herbage;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the streams I will turn into sand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the pools I will clean dry up.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The blind I will lead and guide,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by ways and by paths unfamiliar;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their gloom I will turn into light,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the ground that is rough I will level
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
these are the things I will do,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall not be left undone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}But those that put trust in an idol,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and call an image their god,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall backward be driven in shame.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 A Call for Repentance on Israel\uc1\u8217*s Part

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Hearken. you that are deaf;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you blind, look up, that you see;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Who is blind but My Servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and who is deaf as My Messenger?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who is blind as Mine Envoy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the deaf as the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s Servant?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Much have you seen that you marked not;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your ears, though open, were dead.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}The {\scaps Lord} was pleased, for His righteousness\uc1\u8217* sake,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to make His instruction great and glorious.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Yet it is still a people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
plundered and despoiled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all of them snared in dungeons,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hidden away in prisons \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A prey without prospect of rescue,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a spoil of which none says \uc1\u8216*Restore.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Which of you now will give ear unto this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will attend and hear for the time to come?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Who gave up Jacob to plunderers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel to them that despoiled him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}And poured His hot anger upon him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in fury of war so intense
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that it blazed round about him \uc1\u8211* he knew not why \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and it burned him, yet never heart did he lay it?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord will show His Love for Israel by Gathering her Exiles Home
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 43}But now \uc1\u8211* thus says the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your Creator, O Jacob, your Maker, O Israel \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Fear not, for I have redeemed you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and called you by name: you are Mine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}When you pass through waters, then I will be with you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no rivers shall bear you away in their flood:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When you walk through fire, you shall no wise be scorched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the flames shall not kindle upon you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For I am the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your Deliverer, Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
egypt I give as your ransom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, Seba and Cush in your stead
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Because in My sight you are precious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
both honoured and beloved,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
those lands I will give as your ransom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those peoples in your stead.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore fear not, for I am with you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will bring your seed from the sunrise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gather you out of the sunset;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I will say to the north, \uc1\u8216*Give them up;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And unto the south, \uc1\u8216*Withhold them not.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Bring in My sons from afar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and My daughters from the ends of the earth \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Every one that is called by My name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom I fashioned and made for My glory.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Israel is the 
{\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s Witness to the World
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Forth! you folk that have eyes, but are blind;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you that have ears, yet are deaf.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The nations are all assembled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the peoples are gathered together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Which of them all can declare such a thing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or announce to us such in advance?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let them prove themselves right by the witness they bring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who shall say, when they hear, \uc1\u8216*It is true.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}But {\i you} are My Witnesses \uc1\u8211* thus says the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my Servants, whom I have chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that they may acknowledge and trust Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and learn I am ever the same.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No god was formed before Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and after Me shall be none.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I, even I, am the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Saviour beside Me is none.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}It was I, and no strange god among you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who announced and declared and delivered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You are My witnesses \uc1\u8211* thus says the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I am God from of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}From henceforth ever the same.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
There is none that can snatch from My hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and who can reverse what I do?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Deliverance from Babylon more Wonderful than the Deliverance from Egypt

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Thus says the {\scaps Lord}, your Redeemer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Holy One of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For your sake I send unto Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and down will I bring them in flight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will lay the Chaldeans low,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turn their rejoicing to mourning;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For I am the {\scaps Lord}, your Holy One,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Creator of Israel, your King.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Thus says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who of old made a way through the Sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a path through the mighty waters;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Who chariot and horse led forth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the warriors and war-host together \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They lay down, but they rose no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they were quenched and put out like a wick \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Think of those old things no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor give heed to those deeds of the old time.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}For see! I am doing a new thing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
already it springs to view:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Do you not recognize it?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, a path I will make through the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rivers in the wilderness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The wild beasts shall render Me honour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the jackals and the ostriches.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For with water I dower the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the wilderness with streams,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to yield drink to My chosen people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}The people I formed for Myself,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to tell abroad My praise.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Restoration is Due, not to her own Merits, but to the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Free Grace

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Yet you have not called upon Me, O Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor wearied yourself about Me, O Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}You have not brought unto Me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
burnt offerings of sheep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor did honour Me with your sacrifice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I burdened you not with offerings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor wearied you with frankincense;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}You brought Me no sweet cane with your money,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you sated Me not with the fat of your sacrifice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But you by your sins have burdened Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and through your transgressions have wearied Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Yet I, even I, am He
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that blots out your transgressions;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your sins I remember no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Call to My mind your merits,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let us urge our several pleas;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
reckon up all that you canst,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to prove yourself in the right.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Thine ancient sire was a sinner,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your prophets were rebels against Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}My Temple your princess profaned;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so Jacob I gave to destruction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel to reviling. 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 44}Yet hear now, Jacob My Servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and Israel, whom I have chosen;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Thus says the {\scaps Lord} your Maker,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who formed you and helped you from birth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Fear not, Jacob My Servant;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
jeshurun, whom I have chosen:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For water I will pour on the thirsty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rills on the ground that is dry,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
On your sons I will pour out My spirit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my blessing upon their offspring:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And then shall they grow like the grass among waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like willows by water-courses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}And one shall declare, \uc1\u8216*I belong to the {\scaps Lord};\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Another shall call himself Jacob:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Another shall write on his hand, \uc1\u8216*To the {\scaps Lord},\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And add to his own name the surname of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Israel\uc1\u8217*s God is Sovereign and Eternal

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Thus says the {\scaps Lord}, the King of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his Redeemer, the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am the First, I too am the Last,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beside Me is no god at all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Who is like Me? Let him stand and proclaim
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and declare it and set it in order before Me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who has announced from of old things to come?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let them tell us the things that shall yet come to pass.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Be not disquieted, be not afraid:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Have not I from the old time proclaimed and declared it?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You are my Witnesses: is there a God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or a Rock beside Me at all?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Folly of Idolatry

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Makers of idols are all an illusion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and profitless all are the idols they dote on;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
no vision or insight have whose adore them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and so in the end they shall come but to shame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}(The fool who believes) he has fashioned a god,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has but fashioned a profitless metal image.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The magical arts are all put to shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the words of enchantment are only human.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The worshippers all, when they stand assembled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall tremble and come to confusion together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The smiths prepare it over the coals,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and into the shape that is fitting he hammers it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
working it up with his sturdy arm.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Then hunger comes over him \uc1\u8211* feeble he grows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or faint, if so be that he drinks no water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The carpenter stretches his measuring-line,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with s stylus he traces the shape of the image,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and carves it with tools human likeness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a fair human likeness, to rest in a chapel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Forth a man goes to cut himself timber;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the forest he chooses a plane or an oak,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
which the Lord did plant, and the rain has nourished
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for men to make use of as fuel for kindling.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}He sets it ablaze and he warms himself,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or he kindles a fire, and bakes bread;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
or he makes it into a god and bows down to it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fashions an image and falls down before it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}One half of the wood in the fire he burns,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then he roasts flesh on the embers therefrom;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whereafter he eats the roast to his fill,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then he warms himself, and he says, \uc1\u8216*Ha! ha!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Now I am warm, I feel the glow.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The rest of it then he makes into a god \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to an image, and bows down prostate before it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He prays to it, and his prayer is this:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Deliver you me, for you are my god.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}No insight has he, and no power of discernment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his eyes are besmeared, that he cannot see,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his mind is sealed past understanding.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}He suffers never his thoughts to ponder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has not the sense or the insight to say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*One half thereof in the fire I have burned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bread I have baked on the embers therefrom;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
flesh I have roasted and eaten: and then
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the rest shall I make a detestable image,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bow myself down to a block of wood?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Who takes delight in combustible idols
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is led far astray by delusion of heart:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He cannot deliver himself, and confess
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that his hand has been grasping an utter delusion.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Let the World Rejoice over Israel\uc1\u8217*s Redemption

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Remember these things, O Jacob;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, Israel, for you are My Servant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I made you, My Servant are you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o Israel, you must not renounce Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}I blot out your sins as a mist,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as a thick dark cloud your transgressions;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
return unto Me, for I have redeemed you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Rejoice, O you heavens, for the {\scaps Lord} has wrought it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shout, O you depths of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Break forth into jubilant cries, you mountains;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you forest, and the trees therein.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord} has now wrought redemption for Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he shows His glory in Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Cyrus and the Overthrow of Babylon

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord Calls Cyrus and Bestows upon Him a Career of Victory, for Israel and the World\uc1\u8217*s Sake

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Thus says the {\scaps Lord}, your Redeemer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who formed you from the womb:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am the {\scaps Lord}, Creator of all things,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that stretched forth the heavens alone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spread out the earth by Myself;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}That frustrates the omens of soothsayers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
making diviners like fools,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
thrusting the wise to the background,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turning their science to folly;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}But the words that {\i My} servants have spoken I confirm,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the purpose My messengers urge I fulfil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For I say to Jerusalem, \uc1\u8216*You shall be peopled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28c}The Temple foundations shall yet be laid:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26b}The cities of Judah shall yet be rebuilt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the ruins thereof I will raise again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}I will say to the deep, \uc1\u8216*Be dry;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all your floods I will wither.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28a}Cyrus I name as My friend,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he shall execute all My purpose.
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 45}thus says the (true) God, the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to Cyrus His Anointed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose hand I hold in Mine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to bring down nations before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to open doors before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gates \uc1\u8211* to be closed no more:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*I will go in person before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and mountains I will level;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will shiver the doors of bronze,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cleave bars of iron in sunder.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I will give you the dark-hidden treasures,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in secret places hoarded,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that so you may learn that I am the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the God of Israel, who called you by name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For the sake of Jacob My Servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel My Chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
i called you by your name:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Though you knew Me not, I rejoiced in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I am the {\scaps Lord}, and there is no other;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beside Me is no god at all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 1e}The loins of kings I ungird;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5c}But you will I gird, though you knew Me not;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}That men from the sunrise and sunset
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may know there is none beside Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am the {\scaps Lord}, and there us no other,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The Maker of light, the Creator of darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the Maker of weal, the Creator of woe:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is I, the {\scaps Lord}, that doeth all this.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}You heavens, pour down your showers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let victory rain from the skies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let the earth open (her womb)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And bring forth the fruit of deliverance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let victory blossom therein:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is all My creation, the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s creation.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Murmurs against Cyrus Rebuked

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Woe unto him that strives with his Maker \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a potsherd no better than earthen potsherd.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Doth the clay say to the potter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*What thing is this that you make?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Doth the vessel he wrought exclaim,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*What a handless person you are!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Woe to the son who says,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Sirem what is this you beget?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Or \uc1\u8216*Mother, what bring you forth?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Thus says the (true) God, the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
israel\uc1\u8217*s Maker and Holy One:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Would you ask Me of things to come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or command Me as touching My handiwork?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}It was I \uc1\u8211* the Maker of earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Creator of man upon it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose hands stretched out the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on all their host laid charge \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}It was I who of purpose aroused him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all his ways I smooth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He it is that shall build My city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and set Mine exiles free;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet neither for price nor reward.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Thus says the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Heathen Acknowledge the Uniqueness of Israel and Her God

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Thus says the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The peasants of Egypt, the merchants of Cush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the giant men of Seba,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall pass in procession as lieges before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and walk behind you in chains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall bow to you prostrate, and thus they
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall pray to you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*God is with you alone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there is no other god at all:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Yea, truly with you God hides Himself;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, Israel\uc1\u8217*s God is a Saviour.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Ashamed and confounded together
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are all who have risen up against Him \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the idol-making craftsmen.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}But Israel is saved by the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
With salvation everlasting:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You shall not be ashamed or confounded
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for ever and evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Lord Desires the Salvation of the Whole World

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}For thus says the {\scaps Lord}, God indeed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
creator of the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who made the earth and fashioned it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and also fixed it fast,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
creating it not for a desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but fashioning it for man\uc1\u8217*s home:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*I am the {\scaps Lord}, and there is none other.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Not in secret spake I,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor in any land of darkness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the offspring of Jacob I asked not
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to go in vain quest of Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am the {\scaps Lord}, My words are true,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and straight are My proclamations.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Come, you that survive of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
assemble, draw near together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No shred of sense have they
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that carry an image of wood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and make their prayers to a god
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who is impotent to save.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Declare and bring forward (your case),
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, let them take counsel together:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who has announced this old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or declared it in days gone by?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Is it not I, the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
There is no other god beside Me \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A righteous God, and a Saviour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and none there is beside Me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Look unto Me and saved,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you ends of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for I am God, and there is no other.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}By Mine own self have I sworn
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that to Me every knee shall bow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
every tongue shall swear allegiance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}And own that the {\scaps Lord} alone
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the Giver of strength and of victory.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All that were furious against Him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall come unto Him with shame;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}But all the descendants of Israel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall triumph and boast in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Downfall of Babylon\uc1\u8217*s Gods
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 46}Bel bows down, Nebo stoops:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Consigned are their idols to beasts \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on weary beasts lifted and laden.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}They crouch, they are bowed down together;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unable to rescue their load,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they themselves are gone into captivity.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Hearken to Me, house of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you of Israel\uc1\u8217*s house that remain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all you that from birth have been carried
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and upheld since the day you were born.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Till old age I am ever the same;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till your hair is grey, I will carry you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
It is I that have borne the burden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is I that will carry it still;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is I that will carry and save you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}To whom will you liken or equal Me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Whom will you set as My peer?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}They that freely give gold from a purse
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that weigh in a balance the silver,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
hire a goldsmith to fashion a god of it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then they fall down and worship it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}They carry the load on their shoulder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and set it down on its base,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where it stands, in its place, unmoved.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
It answers no man\uc1\u8217*s cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it saves no man in his trouble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Reflect, then, and own yourselves guilty;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you rebels, lay it to heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Remember the things of long ago;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I am God, and there is none like Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}From the first I declare the issue,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from ancient times things yet to be done;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I declare that My purpose shall stand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will execute all My pleasure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I have called a wild bird from the sunrise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the man of My purpose from a far distant land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will usher in what I promised,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and accomplish the thing that I planned.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Hearken to Me, you faint-hearted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who deem that your triumph is far away;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The triumph I bring you is near, not far,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my deliverance shall not tarry.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will set the deliverance in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lavish My glory on Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Downfall of Babylon
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 47}Come down, and sit in the dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}o virgin daughter of Babylon;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
sit on the ground unthroned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o daughter of the Chaldeans:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For you shall be called no more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Tender and the Dainty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Take mill-stones, and grind the meal;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and put your veil aside.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Strip off your skirt, and pass
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bare-legged through the rivers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Let your nakedness be uncovered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and let your shame be seen.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For vengeance I will take,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
irrevocable vengeance \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Thus says our Redeemer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts is His name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Sit in silence and shrouded in darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o daughter of the Chaldeans;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for you shall be called no more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Mistress of Dominions.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}True, I was wroth with My people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my heritage I profaned;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and I gave them into your hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you showed no pity upon them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you laid upon the aged
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thine exceeding heavy yoke.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}You said, \uc1\u8216*I shall live for ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and be Mistress evermore;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
These things you did lay not heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor did think how it all would end.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Hear this now, Lady of pleasure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who sits so securely,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and says in your heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*It is I, there is none beside me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I shall never sit as a widow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor know the loss of children.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}These two things shall come upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
full swift in a single day \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The loss of your husband and children
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall suddenly come upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
despite your many spells,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
despite your enchantments many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Despite your trust in your wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your fancy that no one can see you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold your wisdom and knowledge \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8217*Tis they that have led you astray;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and you in your heart did say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*It is I, there is none beside me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}So disaster shall come upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which no knowledge of your can avert;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
destruction shall fall upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which you have no power to appease;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
sudden ruin shall come upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which you have no knowledge (to banish).
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Abide, then, by your enchantments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
abide by your sorceries many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wherein you have toiled from your youth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Perchance you may somewhat avail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
perchance you may yet strike terror.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}You have wearied yourself with your counsellors;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
now let them stand up and save you \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Those men that divide up the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
directing their gaze to the stars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and month by month make known
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what things are coming upon you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}But see! they are all like stubble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the fire burns them up.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Not even themselves can they save
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the mighty power of the flame: \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
It is no glowing coal to warm at,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no fire to sit before.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Such then have they proved unto you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in whose cause you have toiled from your youth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your flee staggering, each his own way \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not a man of them all to save you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Summons to Depart from Babylon

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The New Prophecies will be Fulfilled as Surely as the Old
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 48}Hear this, O household of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}called by the name of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sprung from the loins of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that swear by the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and celebrate Israel\uc1\u8217*s God \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but neither with justice or truth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For they call themselves after the Holy City,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lean on the God of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose name is the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Of old I announced predictions,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and uttered them forth from My lips:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Of a sudden I wrought, and they came.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But I knew that you wast stubborn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with a neck like an iron band,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a forehead all of brass;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}So I told it you long ago:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Ere it came to pass, I informed you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In case you should claim that your idol had wrought it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thine images \uc1\u8211* molten or graven \uc1\u8211* appointed it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}You have heard it, now see it fulfilled;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wilt you not bear witness to it?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Restoration of Israel and the Future Glory of Zion

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Servant Discouraged, but at last Triumphant

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Servant: His Seeming Failure and his Great Destiny
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 46}Hearken, you isles, unto me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and you peoples from far, give attention.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} has called me from birth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the womb of my mother He gave me my name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Like a sharp sword made He my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the shadow of His hand did He hide me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he made me a polished shaft,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in His quiver He concealed me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}And He said to me, \uc1\u8216*You are My Servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in whom I will show My glory;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5e}And so I had honour in the sight of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5f}My God became my strength.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But I said, \uc1\u8216*I have laboured in vain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have spent my strength on an empty nothing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet safe is my cause with the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my recompense with my God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5a}And now \uc1\u8211* thus says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who formed me from birth for His Servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to bring Jacob back unto Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that Israel to Him might be gathered \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}He says, \uc1\u8216*It is too light a thing\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
To raise up the tribes of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel\uc1\u8217*s dispersed to restore:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will make you a light to the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that so My salvation may reach
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the very ends of the earth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Happy Return and Restoration

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Thus says the (true) God the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy Redeemer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to him who of men is contemned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
abhorred of the nations, the servant of tyrants:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Kings, when they see you, shall rise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and princes shall bow down in homage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
because of the {\scaps Lord} the Faithful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One, who chose you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Thus says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Now will I favour and answer you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
now will I help and deliver you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
making you pledge and symbol
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of my covenant with mankind:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Restoring the (ruined) land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and allotting the desolate heritage;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Bidding the prisoners go forth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the inmates of darkness to show themselves.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall pasture wherever they go,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even on all the bare hills shall be pasture;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}They shall neither hunger nor thirst,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
neither sun nor the hot wind shall smite them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For One that pitiesshall lead them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and guide them to foundations of water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I will make all the mountains a highway,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and roads shall be raised everywhere.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Lo! yonder they come from afar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
some from the north and the west,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and some from the land of Syene.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Sing, O you heavens, for joy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and earth, do you exult;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the mountains break forth into song.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord} comforts His folk,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
takes pity upon His affected.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Consolation of Zion

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Wasted Zion will be Rebuilt and Repeopled

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*But the {\scaps Lord},\uc1\u8217* says Zion, \uc1\u8216*has left me;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
My Lord has forgotten me clean.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Can a woman forget her babe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cease to pity the son of her womb?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yes, such may indeed forget,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but never will I forget you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}I have graven you on My hands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your walls are for ever before Me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}In haste men are coming to build you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while those that have torn you down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and laid you in ruins, shall leave you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Lift up your eyes round about, and behold
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how they flock to you, all of them gathered together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, thus says the {\scaps Lord} on oath, as I live,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall wear them upon you as jewels on a garment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bind them about you as bride binds her girdle.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}For your desolate wastes and your ruined land
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
(Shall be turned to a garden and crowded with men.)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Then scarce room enough shall you have for your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when those that devoured you are far away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The children you long wast bereft of
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall one day declare in your ears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*This place is too narrow for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give me ampler space to dwell in.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}And then shall you say in your heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Who can have borne me these children?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Since I am bereaved and unfruitful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who can have reared these children?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold! I was left all alone:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who then can these children be?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Three Words of Consolation

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 At a Signal from the 
{\scaps Lord}, the Nations shall Bring Israel Back to Zion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold I will lift up My hand to the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and raise for the people My banner(as signal);
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and then shall they bring your sons in their bosom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and carry your daughters upon their shoulders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Kings shall be your foster-fathers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and queens shall be your nursing mothers;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with face to the earth they shall do you homage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lick the dust of your feet:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And then you shall know that I am the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who never will bring those who trust Me to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 the Lord is Omnipotent

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Can prey from the mighty be wrenched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or can captives escape from a tyrant?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Verily, thus says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yes, even from the mighty can captives be wrenched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the prey of a tyrant escape;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but {\i I} will defend your cause,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\i I} will deliver your children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}And cause your oppressors to eat their own flesh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to drink themselves drunk with their blood as with wine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And then all flesh shall know
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I am your Saviour-Redeemer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord}, the Strong One of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Omnipotent Love
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 50}Thus says the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Where is the bill of your mother\uc1\u8217*s divorcement,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wherewith I have put her away?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Or which of My creditors is it
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to whom I have ever sold you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
If sold you have been, \uc1\u8217*tis because of your sins;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your rebellions have led to your mother\uc1\u8217*s divorce.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Why, when I came, was there no one,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and none to respond when I called?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Is my hand too short to deliver?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And have I no power to rescue?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
With a word of a rebuke did I dry up the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rivers I turned into desert;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their fish dried up for lack of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their monsters perished on thirsty land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I clothed the heavens in mourning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sackcloth I made their covering.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Servant Tried but Trusting

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The Lord the {\scaps Lord} has given me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tongue of a true disciple,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to know how to answer the weary
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with words (of consolation).
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In the morning He wakens mine ear
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to listen, as true disciple;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}As for me, I have not been rebellious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or turned me backward away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I gave my back to the lash,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my cheeks unto those that plucked them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
my face and I did not hide
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from insult or from spitting.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For the Lord of the {\scaps Lord} helps me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and so I am not confounded;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I set my face like a flint,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I know I shall never be shamed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}My Vindicator is nigh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who then dare to contend with me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let us both stand up together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who dare be mine opponent?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let him draw nigh unto me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}See, the {\scaps Lord} the Lord is my helper;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where, then, is the man that can worst me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They all like a garment shall crumble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the moth shall eat them up.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Let that man among you that fears the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Give ear to the voice of His Servant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Whoso walks in darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with not a gleam of light,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let him trust in the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lean upon his God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}All you that kindle a fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you that set brands aflame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
begone to the flame of your fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
get you into the brands you have lighted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
This is your fate at My hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you lie in the place of torment.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Words of Encouragement and Promise

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Deliverance is Near and Sure
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 51}Hearken to me, you that yearn for redress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}that seel for the aid of the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
look to the rock from which you were hewn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the quarry from which you were dug.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Look unto Abraham your father,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Sarah-her who bore you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For he was but one, when I called him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet I blessed him and increased him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}So the {\scaps Lord} has comforted Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has comforted all her ruins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
her desert has made like the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own garden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like Eden itself her wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Therein shall joy and gladness be found,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
giving of thanks and the sound of melody.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Give heed unto Me, My people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o nation of Mine, give ear;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for from Me shall direction go forth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
even My law to enlighten the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I will bring My deliverance swiftly;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my victory is now on the way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mine Arms shall judge the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For Me do the islands wait,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall set their hope in My Arm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Lift up your eyes to the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and look on the earth beneath;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the heavens shall vanish like smoke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth like a garment (shall perish;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the world) shall crumble to pieces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her people shall die like gnats:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But eternal shall be My salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my triumph shall not fail.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Hearken to Me, you that care for the right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you folk in whose heart is My teaching;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
be not afraid of the insults of men,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let no their reviling dismay you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For even as a garment the moth shall consume them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the worm shall consume them like wool;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but eternal shall be My salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my triumph from age to age.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Appeal to the Lord to Show His Ancient Power

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Awake, O Arm of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
awake, and clothe you with might;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
awake as in days of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as in ancient generations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Art {\i you} not the Arm that hewed Rahab in pieces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and pierced the dragon through?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Art {\i you} not the Arm that once dried up the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the waters of mighty ocean,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that made the depths of the sea
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a way for the ransomed to pass?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I, I am He comforts you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How then should you be afraid
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
of frail man that shall die, or of mortal
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that passes away like the grass;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And forgets the {\scaps Lord} your Maker,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who stretched forth the heavens and founded the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and lives in ceaseless dread
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the fury of the oppressor?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Where is now the oppressor\uc1\u8217*s fury,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who aimed at your destruction?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Soon shall the captive be freed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he shall not end in death and the pit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor suffer for lack of bread.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}I am the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who stirs the sea into roaring waves:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} of Hosts is My name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}And I put My words in your mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the shadow of My hand did I hide you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when I stretched forth the heavens and founded the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and said unto Zion, \uc1\u8216*My people are you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s Affliction: Her Speedy Redemption and Glory

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Bestir you, bestir you; arise, O Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who have drunk at the hand of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The cup of His indignation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the bowl that bewilders have drained to the dregs.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Of all the sons you have borne
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there is not man to guide you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
of all the sons you have reared
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there is none to take your hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}A twofold woe has befallen you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who may with you condole?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Wreck and Ruin, Famine and Sword \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and who may comfort you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Your sons in a swoon were lying
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like an antelope in a net,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
filled full with the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s fury
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with the rebuke of your God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore hear now this, you afflicted one,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
drunken, but not with wine:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Thus says your Lord the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your God who defends His people:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Behold, from your hand I have taken
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the cup that brings bewilderment;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the chalice of My fury
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall never drink again.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}I will hand it to your tormentors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to those that afflicted you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and commanded you to bow down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that they might pass over you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, you made your back like the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a street for men to pass over.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 52}Awake, awake, O Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}put on your garment of strength;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
put on your glorious raiment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o Holy City, Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For never shall enter you more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the uncircumcised or unclean.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Shake yourself from the dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and arise, O captive Jerusalem;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
loose you the bands of your neck,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
o captive daughter of Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For thus says the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*For nought were you sold and {\super\cf2\fs24 4}without money shall you be redeemed.\uc1\u8217* For thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*My people went down at the first to Egypt to sojourn there; and Assyria oppressed them {\super\cf2\fs24 5}without cause. And now,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*wherein have I been advantaged here, in that My people have been taken away for nought? See! those who waited for Me,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*are become a byword, and My name is ever ceaselessly reviled. Therefore in that day shall My people know My name, that it is I who have promised. Behold, it is I.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}How fair are the feet on the mountains
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of him that proclaims good tidings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the herald of peace and good tidings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that brings the news of deliverance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that says unto Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Your God reigns.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Your watchmen lift up their voices
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in jubilant cries together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for eye to eye they look
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the {\scaps Lord} returning to Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You ruins of wasted Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
break into singing together:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord} comforts His people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he brings Jerusalem redemption.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}In the sight of all nations the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Has bared His holy arm;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all the ends of the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall see how our God has saved us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Away, away. get you hence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and touch no unclean thing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
get you forth from her, make yourselves pure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you that bear the vessels of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Nor need you go forth in haste,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor depart as though you were fugitives;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} goes before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel\uc1\u8217*s God is your rear guard.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Humiliation and Exaltation of the Servant

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The servant: His Sufferings and His Great Glory

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}See, Israel My Servant shall yet be exalted
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and raised exceeding high.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}And as many were erstwhile appalled at his fate
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
(And kings at his destiny shuddered),
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}so many a nation shall yet do him homage
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and kings shall be silent for awe of him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For what they had never been told shall they see,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall gaze upon things unheard of before. 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 53}\uc1\u8216*Who could have ever believed\uc1\u8217* (they shall say)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}\uc1\u8216*Such a tale as that which we hear?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And to whom has the arm of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Been ever so revealed?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Sorrows, Humiliation, and Death of the Servant

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}He grew like a sapling before us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a shoot out of ground that was dry;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
no beauty had he to attract us, 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\cf1 52}No figure to win our regard;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14b}He was marred beyond human semblance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14c}He looked like a man no more.
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 53}He was spurned and forsaken of men,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 3}familiar with suffering and pain;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as one from whom men hide their faces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he was spurned and we heeded him not.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But {\i ours} was the pain that {\i he} bore,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the sorrows he carried were ours;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet by {\i us} he was counted as smitten
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tortured by God\uc1\u8217*s own hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But ours was the sin that pierced him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the guilt that crushed him was ours:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, {\i he} was chastised for {\i our} welfare,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and {\i his} stripes brought healing to {\i us}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}We had all of us wandered like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
each turning a way of his own,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
while the {\scaps Lord} had laid upon {\i him}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The iniquity of us all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Though outraged, he was submissive,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he opened not his mouth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like a lamb that is led to the slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or sheep that with shearers is dumb.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}He was dragged away by injustice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and who gave a thought to his fate?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He was torn from the land of the living,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and smitten to death for the sins that were ours.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}His grave was appointed with rebels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his funeral mound with the wicked;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
although he had done no violence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor was any deceit in his mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Servant\uc1\u8217*s Ultimate Exultation and Glory

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8217*Twas the will of the {\scaps Lord} that crushed him with pain;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but by yielding himself as an offering for sin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he shall yet see an offspring, his days shall be long,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the purpose of God shall through him be triumphant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}For He has delivered his soul from anguish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his eyes He has filled with abundance of light.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*In the of the many My Servant stands justified,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
theirs is the guilt that this man bears.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For this he shall win with the great an inheritance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he with the strong shall divide the spoil;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
because he had poured out his soul unto death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and had suffered himself to be numbered with rebels;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
though the sins that he bore were the sins of the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and for those very rebels he had offered his prayer.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Future Glory of Jerusalem
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 54}Sing, you barren, that did not bear,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}you that travailed not, break forth into singing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for more are the sons of the woman forlorn
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than the sons \uc1\u8211* says the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211* of her that is married.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Enlarge the space for your tent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stretch out your canvas unstintingly;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lengthen your cords, and your stakes fasten well,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For to right and to left shall you spread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your sons shall possess the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and people the cities now desolate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Fear not, for never shall you be ashamed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor put to the blush, therefore be not confounded.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The shame of your youth you shall clean forget,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and remember no more the reproach of your widowhood.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For your husband is He that made you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts is His name;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your Redeemer is Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the God of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}As a wife forsaken and grieved.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
To Himself has the {\scaps Lord} recalled you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
can a wife wooed in youth be rejected?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Thus says the {\scaps Lord} your God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I forsook you a little while,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but in great compassion I will gather you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}In a burst of wrath for a moment
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I hid my face from you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but with love everlasting I pity you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord} your Redeemer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Like the days of Noah are these days to Me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
As I sware that the waters of Noah
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
should no more pass over the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so I swear I shall never again
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be angry with you, or rebuke you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Though the mountains should remove,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the hills be utterly shaken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet from you shall My love never move,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
nor My covenant of peace be shaken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord}, who pities you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You that wast sore afflicted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tossed by the storm and uncomforted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Behold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your base I will set in rubies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in sapphires your foundations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I will make your pinnacles jasper,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your gates of carbuncle stones,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all your borders of jewels.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} shall teach your builders,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and greatly prosper your children;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Through righteousness shall you endure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Far shall you be from oppression,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, you shall have nothing to fear:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Far shall you be from destruction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it shall not come nigh unto you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}If any should stir up strife,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it cometh not from Me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who stirs up strife against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall fall upon you to his ruin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Behold! It is I who created the smith
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that blows the fire of coals,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
bringing weapons forth for their work.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is I who created Destroyer to ravage.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Success shall never attend
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the weapon forged against you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the tongue that is raised against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be worsted evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Such is the lot of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s Servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and this will I vindicate them, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Invitation to Embrace the Impending Salvation

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Blessings in Store for Israel
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 55}Ho! all that are thirsty, come you to the waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and you that have no money, come;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
buy you and eat without money,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
buy wine and milk without price.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Why spend you silver for that which can satisfy no one?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And your money for that which can satisfy no one?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
If you hearken to Me, you shall eat what is good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your soul shall be ravished with dainties.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Incline your ear and come unto Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hear, that your soul may revive;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for with you I will enter a bond everlasting
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of kindness, once promised to David and sure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For, as once to the nations I made him My Witness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
appointing him Prince and Commander of nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}So now shall you summon a people you know not,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
people who know you not shall run unto you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the sake of the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Holy One of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because He has girt you with glory.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Wonderful Salvation is Near: Forth, then, from Babylon!

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Seek you the {\scaps Lord}, while He may be found,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
call you upon Him, while He is near.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Let the wicked forsake his way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the sinful man hi thoughts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let him turn unto the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and He will have pity upon him \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And unto our God, for He
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will plentifully pardon.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For My thoughts are not your thoughts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor are your ways Mine, says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}But as heaven is higher than earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so are My ways higher than your ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and My thoughts higher than your thoughts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For even as the rain and the snow
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that descend from the heaven, return not
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
without having watered the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and caused it to bear and sprout,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Even so shall it be with the word
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that has issued out of My mouth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
It shall not return to Me void,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it shall execute My pleasure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and carry My mission to triumph.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For with joy shall you go forth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in peace shall you be led out;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the mountains and the hills
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall break into singing before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all the trees of the forest
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall clap their hands together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}For the thorn shall come up the fir,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the brier shall come up the myrtle;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it shall be for the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s renown,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for a sign everlasting that never shall perish.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Later Voices of Rebuke, Threat, and Promise

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 A Word of Cheer to Those who are in Danger of Being Excluded from the Church
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 56}Thus says the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Keep the law, and do that which is right:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For soon My deliverance cometh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my justice will soon be revealed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Happy the man who thus doeth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the mortal that holds it fast \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He that keeps the Sabbath unsullied,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that keeps his hand from all evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}And let not the foreigner say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who has joined himself unto the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*the {\scaps Lord} will separate me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
most assuredly form His people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And let not the eunuch say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Behold, a dry tree am I.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For thus says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*The eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
make choice of the things I delight in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hold My covenant fast \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}In My house and within My walls
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will give them a name and a monument
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
better than sons and daughter:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will give them a name everlasting
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that never shall be cut off.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}And the foreigners joined to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that serve Him and love His name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and are pledged to be His servants \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All that keep the Sabbath unsullied
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hold His covenant fast \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I will bring to My holy Mountain;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fill them with joy in My House of Prayer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be welcomed upon Mine altar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And My House shall be known by the name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8217*House of Prayer for every nation.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who gathers the outcasts of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*I will yet gather others to him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beside those that already are gathered.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Demoralization of Leaders and People

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Sensuous Leaders

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}All you wild beasts of the field,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you wild beasts of the forest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
come hither to devour.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}My watchmen are blind, every one,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with no knowledge of how to give heed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Dumb dogs they are, every one of them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lacking the power to bark;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but there they lie a-dreaming
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the slumber that they love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Yes, greedy dogs are they,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that never can have enough;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but each to his own way turns,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
each on his own gain bent:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Come, wine let us fetch\uc1\u8217* (they say),
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Let us fill ourselves with drink,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and to-morrow shall be as to-day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a royal uproarious day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 57}The righteous are being destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and no man lays it to heart;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the godly are swept away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and no man gives it a thought.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8217*Tis the wickedness prevailing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that sweeps the righteous away;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}But he enters into peace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those whose walk has been upright
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do rest at last on their biers.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Idolatrous People

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}But {\i you} \uc1\u8211* hither approach,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you children of a sorcerers;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you offspring of whore and adulterer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Whom are you making sport of?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
At whom are you making wide mouths,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and putting out our tongue?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Are you not apostate children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a very brood of falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}That inflame yourselves at the oaks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and under each green tree;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that in valleys slaughter children
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
amidst the clefts of the rocks?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The slippery gods of the valley \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those, those you have taken for your portion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yes, to them you have poured your drink-offerings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rendered on oblation:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And shall I with such things be appeased?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}And you did set your bed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on a high and lofty mountain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and thither you did go
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to offer up your sacrifice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Behind the door and the door-posts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your symbol you did set;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
inflamed, you did uncover,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
didst go up and enlarge your bed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And you did purchase you lovers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose wantonness you loved;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and did multiply your whoredoms,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when your eyes beheld the phallus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For Melech you did anoint you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Multiply your perfumes;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you did send your ambassadors far,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, down to the depths of Sheol.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Though weary with many journeys,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you said not, \uc1\u8216*I despair.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But ever new strength you gained,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and therefore you did not desist.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Of whom wast you then in such abject terror
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you did play the traitor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and gave no thought to Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor did lay your duty to heart?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I hid Mine eyes in silence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Me you did not fear.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}But I will expose your doings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
this \uc1\u8216*righteousness\uc1\u8217* of your.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}When you cry, your hateful idols
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall profit you nothing, nor save you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the wind shall lift them all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a breath shall take them away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But who trusts in Me shall possess the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and inherit My holy Mountain.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Blessings in store for the Faithful

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}O raise, raise a highway, and clear you a path,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
take the stumbling-blocks out of the way of My people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For thus says He that is high and exalted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose throne is for ever, whose name is Holy:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*On high as the Holy One sit I enthroned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with him that is crushed, that is lowly in spirit;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to quicken the spirit of them that are lowly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the heart of all such as crushed to revive.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For not for ever will I contend,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor cherish Mine anger evermore;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for then would the spirits faint before Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the souls that I Myself have made.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Because of his sin I was worth for a moment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I smote him in anger and hid My face:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But he kept to the way of his rebel heart \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}I have noted his ways,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*But now will I bring to him healing and rest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and requite him with full consolation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}The lips of his mourners shall blossom with praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when to far and to near I bring peace and prosperity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Whose waters cast up mire and dirt.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}So peace there is none, says my God, to the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The true and the False Worship

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Fasting
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 58}Cry with full throat and refrain not,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}lift up your voice like a trumpet;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
declare to My people their sins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their guilt to the household of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Daily indeed they consult Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their joy is to learn My ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like a nation that doeth the right
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and forsaken not the law of its God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They ask Me to guide then aright,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they delight to draw nigh unto God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Why look You not when we fast?\uc1\u8217* (they say)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Why heed You not our self-chastening?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But on fast-days you think of your business,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you drive all your workmen like slaves.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}See! you fast for strife and contention,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you smite the poor with your fists.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Such fasting as yours to-day
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will not carry your prayers on high.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Can such be the fast of My choice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a day for self-mortification?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To bow one\uc1\u8217*s head like a bulrush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to lie upon sackcloth and ashes \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Is this what you call a fast,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a day that the {\scaps Lord} accepts?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Is the fast of My choice not this \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To loose the unjust fetters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to undo the bands of the yoke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to let those that are crushed go free,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to snap each yoke in sunder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}To break your bread to the hungry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to bring the homeless home: \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When you see the naked, to cover him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to hide not yourself from your kinsmen?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Then shall your light break forth as the dawn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your wounds shall be speedily healed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In front shall your righteousness march,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own glory behind you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Then, when you call, the {\scaps Lord} shall answer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and say, when you cry for help, \uc1\u8216*Here am I.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
If from your midst you remove the yoke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the finger of scorn and the speech that is mischievous;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}If to the hungry you give your bread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the soul that is bowed you dost satisfy:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Then in the darkness your light shall arise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your gloom shall be as the noonday:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} shall guide you for evermore,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your soul in the land that is parched He will satisfy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your strength He will make new again,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you like a well-watered garden shall be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a fountain of water, whose waters fail not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The ancient ruins your sons shall rebuild,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall rear once again the foundations of old;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and you shall be called the Repairer of Ruins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who makes waste places a home again.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Sabbath

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}If you turn away your foot from the Sabbath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from doing your business on My holy day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and calls the Sabbath a sheer delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the holy (day) of the {\scaps Lord} honourable,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and honours it by not doing your wont,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor heeding your business, nor speaking idly:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Then shall you have your delight in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and over the heights of the earth shall you ride;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will give you the portion of Jacob your father
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in full to enjoy, as the {\scaps Lord} has promised.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Sinful People and the Devine Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Sins
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 59}Behold, the hands of the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Is not too short to save,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor His ear too dull to hear.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Your iniquities are the barrier
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
between your God and you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your sins have hidden His face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and therefore He will not hear you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For your hands are stained with blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your fingers with iniquity;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your lips have uttered falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your tongue mutters depravity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}No one sues the integrity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no one with honesty pleads;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they trust in pretence and lies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
conceive trouble and bring forth mischief.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Basilisks\uc1\u8217* eggs they hatch,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spiders\uc1\u8217* webs they weave:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who eats their eggs shall die,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the egg that is crushed breaks out as a viper.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Their webs cannot serve as a garment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with that which they fabricate no man can clothe himself;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for evil is what they fabricate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their hands work deeds of violence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Their feet run to evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they haste to shed innocent blood;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their thoughts are thoughts of mischief,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their paths are Wreck and Ruin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The ways of peace they know not,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no justice is in their tracks:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For their own selfish ends they have twisted their paths;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who treads thereon is a stranger to peace.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Confession

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For this cause our right remains far,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and no victory yet overtakes us;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
we look for the light, but lo! darkness \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for brightness, but walk in the gloom.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}We grope, like the blind, by the wall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, like men that are sightless we grope;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
we stumble at noon as in twilight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in darkness we dwell like the dead.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}We all of us roar like bears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like doves we sadly mourn;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
we look \uc1\u8211* but in vain \uc1\u8211* for justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
salvation is far away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Our transgressions before You are many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our sins do witness against us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
our transgressions are ever with us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we know our iniquities well \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Rebellion, denial of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turning away from our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
speaking revolt and perverseness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and uttering lies from the heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Justice is driven back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and righteousness stands afar;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in the market-place truth stumbles,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rectitude cannot enter.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}So truth is not to be found,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and insight departs from the city.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
At the sight was the {\scaps Lord} displeased,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he was angry that justice was lacking.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}He saw with utter amaze
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not a man to interpose;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so His own arm wrought Him deliverance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his righteous might upheld Him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}He put on the breastplate of righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on His head the helm of salvation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he put on the garments of vengeance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the mantle of passion He clothed Him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}He renders recompense matching desert \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wrath to His enemies, shame to His foes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}So shall those in the west fear the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those at the sunrise behold His glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He shall come like a pent-up stream,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which the breath of the {\scaps Lord} drives.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}But to Zion He comes as Redeemer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and removes transgressors from Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}This covenant with them I make, says the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
My spirit that is upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the words I have put in your mouth \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Shall not depart form your mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor from the mouth of your children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
nor yet from the mouth of your children\uc1\u8217*s children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord}, from the henceforth and evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Glory of the New Jerusalem
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 60}Arise, shine, for your light is now come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and on {\i you} is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own glory arisen.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For, though darkness covers the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the nations are wrapped in gloom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet on {\i you} the {\scaps Lord} shines forth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
over {\i you} His glory appears.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}And nations shall come to the light that {\i you} shed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and kings to the brightness that streams from {\i you}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Lift up your eyes round bout and behold
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how they flock to you, all of them gathered together \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your sons coming in from afar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the arms of their nurses your daughters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}At the sight of them you shall be radiant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your heart shall tremble and throb;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the wealth of the sea shall be turned unto you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto you shall the nations come in with their treasures.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}A stream of camels shall cover you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
young camels of Midian and Ephah;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all those of Sheba shall come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
laden with gold and frankincense,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tell of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s renown.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}All the flocks of Kedar
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall gather unto you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the rams of Nebaioth shall seek you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they shall mount with acceptance Mine altar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my House of Prayer shall be radiant with beauty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Who are these that fly like a cloud,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or like doves to their latticed cotes?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For ships unto Me are gathering \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
vessels of Tarshish in front \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To bring your sons from afar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with them their silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to the name of the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the Holy One of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because He has girt you with glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Strangers shall build your walls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their kings unto you shall be ministers;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the wrath that moved Me to smite you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is turned into favour and pity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Your gates shall ever be open,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not shut by day or nigh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that the wealth of nations be brought you \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their kings at the head of the train.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For the nation and the kingdom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that serve you not shall perish:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Yea, utterly waste shall those nations be.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The glory of Lebanon shall come unto you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the pine-tree, the plane, and the cypress together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that the House where My holiness dwells may be fair,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the place where I walk may be covered with glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The sons of those that afflicted and scorned you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall come unto you, all lowly bending,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and give you the name of \uc1\u8216*the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own City,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Zion of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Holy One.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Whereas you have been forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unvisited, abhorred,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
an eternal pride I make you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a joy unto all generations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}You shall suck the milk of nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yea, royal breasts shall you suck;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and then shall you know that I,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord}, am your Saviour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and He that redeems you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the Mighty One of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}For brass I will bring in gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and silver instead of iron,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
brass in the place of wood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and iron in place of stones;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and Peace I will set to govern you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Justice to be your lord.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Violence shall no more be heard in your land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor rapine nor ruin within your borders;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but a Sure Defence you shall call your walls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your gates you shall name Renown.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}The sin shall no more be your light by day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor yet shall the moon shed her brightness upon you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} shall be your eternal Light,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your God shall be your glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Your sun shall set no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your moon shall wane no more;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} shall be your eternal Light,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the days if your grief shall be ended.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Your people shall all be righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
possessing the land for ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the shoot of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s planting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the work of His hands, for His glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}The smallest shall grow to a clan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the least to a mighty nation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I (who have promised), the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will hasten it in its time.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Proclamation of Zion\uc1\u8217*s Redemption
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 61}The spirit of the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} the Lord is upon me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because I have been by the {\scaps Lord} anointed:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He has sent to me to bring glad news to the wretched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to bind up hearts that are broken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to proclaim release unto captives,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and freedom to men in bonds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}To proclaim the year of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s favour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the day of our God\uc1\u8217*s revenge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to comfort all that mourn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}To give them a garland for ashes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the oil of joy for the garment of mourning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a song of praise for a spirit bedimmed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and oak-trees of righteousness they shall be called,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the plants of the {\scaps Lord} reflecting His glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}They shall build the ancient ruins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
restoring the places long desolate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
renewing the wasted cities,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that age upon age have been desolate.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Strangers shall stand and feed your flocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and aliens shall be your ploughmen and vine-dressers:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}But {\i you} shall be called The Priests of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the name you shall bear shall be Ministers of our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The wealth of the nations shall be yours to enjoy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall deck yourselves with their splendour.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}A twofold measure of shame has been theirs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and theirs was a lot of contempt and insult,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so now in their own land their share shall be doubled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and theirs shall be joy everlasting.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For I am the {\scaps Lord}, the lover of justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
iniquitous plunder is hateful to Me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
faithfully then their reward I will give them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and enter with them in a bond everlasting.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Their sons shall be famous all over the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their offspring among the nations;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then those that behold them shall all acknowledge
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that this is the race that the {\scaps Lord} has blessed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For as surely as earth puts forth her shoots,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the seed springs up that is sown in a garden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} the Lord will make victory spring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and renown, before all the world.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*I will greatly rejoice in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my soul shall exult in my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who has clothed me in robes of salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and decked me with mantle of victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
like bridegroom that fixes his turban
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or bride that adorns herself with her jewels.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 62}For Zion\uc1\u8217*s sake I will not keep silence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}for Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s sake I will not rest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
till her victory issue forth clear as the light,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her deliverance bright as a burning torch,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}So that nations shall see you are victor indeed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and kings, every one, shall behold your glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But you shall be called by a name that is new,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s mouth shall determine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Fair crown shall you be in the hand of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a diadem royal in the hand of your God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}No more shall your name be Forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor your land called Desolate more:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But your name shall be called My Delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your land My Wedded Wife;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} delights in you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your land shall indeed be wedded.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For even as a youth weds a maiden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so your Builder shall wed with you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and as bridegroom rejoices in bride,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so your God shall rejoice over you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Over your walls, Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have appointed watchmen;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all the day and night
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they never hold their peace.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You whose task it is
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to keep the {\scaps Lord} in mind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Take to yourselves no rest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and give no rest unto Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
until that He establish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
until that He make Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
renowned in the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}By His right hand the {\scaps Lord} has sworn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and by His mighty arm:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Never again will I suffer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your foes to devour your corn;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
never again shall strangers
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
drink the wine for which you have toiled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Bur those that have garnered shall eat it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with songs of praise to the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and those that have gathered shall drink it
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
within My holy courts.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Pass you, pass through the gates,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
prepare you a way for the people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
cast you, cast up the highway,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gather out the stones,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and raise for the peoples a banner.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Behold, to the ends of the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has the {\scaps Lord} made proclamation:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Say to the daughter of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
behold, your salvation is come.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold His reward is with Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and His recompense before Him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}They shall call them the Holy People,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Redeemed of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and you shall be called Frequented,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the City Unforsaken.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Destruction of the Foes of Zion
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 63}\uc1\u8216*Who is this that cometh from Edom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}in bright-red garments from Bozrah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so glorious in hi apparel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
marching in fullness of strength?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*It is I, that have promised deliverance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I that am mighty to save.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Why is your raiment so red,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your garments like his that treads in the wine-press?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I have trodden the wine-trough alone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the nations was no man with Me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so I trod them in Mine anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trampled them down in My fury;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
their life-blood besprinkled My garments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all Mine apparel I stained.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}In My heart was the day of revenge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the year of redemption was come.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I looked with utter amaze \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there was none to help or uphold;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so Mine own arm, wrought Me the victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my fury \uc1\u8211* it upheld Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}In Mine anger I trod down the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in My furry I broke them in pieces:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Their life-blood I spilt on the ground.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Passionate Prayer for the Divine Favour

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Thanksgiving for Ancient Mercies

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s renown I would celebrate \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all His loving-kindness \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
As befits the deeds that the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so rich in goodness, has wrought for us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even for the household of Israel \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Wrought for us in His pity
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and loving-kindness great.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Surely My people are they,\uc1\u8217* He said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Sons that will not prove false.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And so He became their Saviour
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from all that did distress them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}No envoy was it or angel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but His own very presence that saved them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In His love and in His pity
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he did Himself redeem them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he took them up and carried them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the days of old.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}But as for them, they resisted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and grieved His holy spirit;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so He turned to be their foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Himself did fight against them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Then (Israel) remembered
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the days of the old time, (and said):
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Where is He that brought up from the sea
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the shepherd of His flock?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And where is He that set
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in their midst His holy spirit;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}That caused His glorious arm
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to go at the right hand of Moses;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that cleft the waters before them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to make Him a name everlasting;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
13a That led them through the depths
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13b}With steps that never faltered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
13c Like cattle that stray to the valley,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14a}Or horse on the open pasture?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14b}May Your spirit, the {\scaps Lord}, guide us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as once You did lead Your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to make You a glorious name.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Passionate Entreaty for the Devine Forgiveness and Pity

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Look down from heaven, and behold
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from Your holy and glorious palace.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Where are Your zeal and Your prowess,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the voice of Your yearning and pity?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Though Abraham knows us not,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel does not regard us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet are You, O the {\scaps Lord}, our Father,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our Redeemer from of old is Your name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Why dost You leave us, the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to wander away from Your paths?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And why dost You suffer our hearts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to grow hard and strange to Your fear?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
O return for Your Servants\uc1\u8217* sake,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the sake of the tribes of Your heritage.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Why do the wicked make light of Your holy place?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Why do our enemies tread down Your Temple?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}We are grown like those whom You rule no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who have never been called by Your name.
\par}

{\pard 
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 64}O that the heavens You would rend and come down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}that the mountains might quake at Your presence \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}As fire sets brushwood ablaze,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as fire causes water to boil \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To make known Your name to Your foes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so that nations might tremble before You,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}While terrible things you do,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
surpassing our expectations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Unheard-of from olden time!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No ear has ever heard,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no eye has ever seen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the mighty deeds You wilt do
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for those that wait for You.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}O that you would meet
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with those that are doers of righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those that remember Your ways!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But behold, You wast wroth with our sin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and of broken faith were we guilty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}We are all like men defiled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a blood-stained cloth is our righteousness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
we are all like withered leaves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
swept away by the blast of our guilt.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}There is none that calls on Your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or bestirs himself to lay hold of You.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For Your face You have hidden from us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and delivered us up to our guilt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But now, O the {\scaps Lord}, our Father are You;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we are the clay, and You are the Potter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the work of Your hand are we all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}O be not, the {\scaps Lord}, exceeding wroth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and do not remember our guilt for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold, look, we beseech You,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for we are all Your people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Your holy cities are now a desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
jerusalem is accursed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Our holy and beautiful House,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wherein our fathers praised You,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has been burned up with fire;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all the places we cherished
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are lying now in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}At things like these, O the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
can You restrain Yourself?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And wilt You still keep silence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and afflict us very sore?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Blessedness of the Faithful and the Doom of the Apostates

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fate of the Apostates
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 65}I was ready to offer an answer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}to those that consulted Me not;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and to suffer Myself to be found
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of those that had sought Me not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Here am I, here am I,\uc1\u8217* I said
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to a people that call not upon Me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I spread out My hands all the day
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to a rebel unruly people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that walk in a way not good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but after their own devices \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}A people who even to My face
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
continually provoke Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
sacrificing in gardens
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and burning incense on tiles \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}That sit among the graves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spend the night in caves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that eat the flesh of swine
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and unclean broth from their vessels \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}That say, \uc1\u8216*Keep by yourself,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
keep away from me, lest I infect you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Such men are a smoke in My nostrils,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a fire that blazes for ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Behold, it is written before Me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will not, says the {\scaps Lord}, keep silence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Until I have punished their guilt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the guilt of their fathers together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who have burned on the mountains incense,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and dishonoured Me on the hills.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So first their reward I will measure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then into their bosom requite it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Destiny of the Faithful in the Impending Judgment

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Thus says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
As when new wine is found in the cluster,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and one says, \uc1\u8216*Destroy it not,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because it contains a blessing;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Even so will I do for My Servants\uc1\u8217* sake,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will not destroy the whole.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}I will bring out of Jacob a seed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and from Judah and heir to My mountains:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The land shall be owned by My Chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and there shall My Servants dwell.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}And Sharon shall then be a pasture for flocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the valley of Anchor for cattle to rest in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for My people who have sought Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But you that forsake the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and forget My holy Mountain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that spread forth a table for Fortune,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and pour out mixed wine unto Destiny:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I destine you for the sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall all bow down to the slaughter.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For you answered not when I called,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I spake, but you did not listen;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you did that which was vile in My sight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and made choice of the things that displeased Me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore thus says the Lord the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold, My Servants shall eat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you shall be hungry;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
behold, My Servants shall drink,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you shall be thirsty;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
behold, My Servants shall be joyful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you shall be ashamed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Behold, My Servants shall shout
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for gladness of heart;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but for sorrow of heart {\i you} shall cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you shall wail for vexation of spirit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Behold, you shall leave your name
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for My Chosen to curse by:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold, by a far other name
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall My Servants be called.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}He that prays in the land for a blessing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall appeal to the God of truth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and he that swears in the land
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall swear by the God of truth \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When the former distress is forgotten
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hidden from Mine eyes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}For behold I will soon create
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the heavens and the earth anew.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Glorious Future

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The past shall not be remembered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor come into mind again;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}But men shall for ever rejoice and exult
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
over this My (new) creation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For behold! I will straightway create
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
jerusalem a rejoicing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and her people an exultation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}For I will exult in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in My people rejoice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No more shall be heard within her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the voice of weeping or crying;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}No more shall be found therein
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a babe of (a few brief) days,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
or an old man who has not completed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the full tale of his days;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but he that dies the youngest
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall have lived for a hundred years,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and he that dies less than a hundred
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall be counted a man accursed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}They shall dwell in the homes they have built,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
eat the fruit of the vines they have planted;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}No others shall dwell in the homes your have built,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor shall others enjoy what they planted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For the days of My folk shall be many
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the days of the life of a tree,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the work that their hands have achieved
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall My Chosen enjoy to the end.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}They shall not labour in vain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor rear their children to perish;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for a race that is blest of the {\scaps Lord} are they,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their offspring shall live by their side.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}I will answer or ever they call,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will hearken while still they are speaking.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}The wolf and the lamb shall then pasture together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the lion eat straw like the ox:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
But the serpent \uc1\u8211* its food shall be dust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
None shall do hurt, says the {\scaps Lord}, or havoc,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on all My holy Mountain.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Doom Pronounced upon those who Purpose to Build a Rival Temple
 
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 66}Thus says the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The heaven is My throne, and the earth is My footstool;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
what manner of house would you build Me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
What manner of home would you rear?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For all this is the work of My hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and these things are all Mine, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But this is the man I regard \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the afflicted and broken in spirit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who trembles at My word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Oxen they kill forsooth \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but men they also slay;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and sheep they sacrifice \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but dogs they also strangle:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They offer their oblations \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but also the blood of swine;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they bring their memorial incense,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but they also bless the idol.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Such are the ways {\i they} have chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
foul rites are the joy of their soul;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}So {\i I} choose that {\i they} shall be harassed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the things that they dread I will bring on them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Because, when I called, none responded;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they listened not, when I spoke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but did that which was vile in My sight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and made choice of the things that displeased Me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Faithful Cheered by the Prospect of Zion\uc1\u8217*s Prosperity

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Hear you the word of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you that at {\i His} word tremble:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your brethren, that hate you and loathe you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for My name\uc1\u8217*s sake, have said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Let the {\scaps Lord} show forth His glory
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that we too may look on your joy:\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
But {\i they} shall put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Hark! from the City an uproar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Hark! from the Temple it cometh.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Hark! \uc1\u8217*tis the {\scaps Lord} Himself
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
dealing recompense unto His foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But {\i she} has brought forth a son
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before her hour of travail;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
before her pains came upon her,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of a man-child was she delivered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Who has heard the like?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who has seen aught like this?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Can it be that a single day
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may see the birth of a people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that a nation be born all at once?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For no sooner had Zion travailed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than she brought her sons to the birth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Shall {\i I} not help to bring forth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what I bring to the birth, says the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Or shall I, having brought to the birth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then close up the womb, says your God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}O Jerusalem, rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and exult in her, all you that love her.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Be joyful with her exceedingly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you that mourned over her;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}That so you may suck to the full
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the breasts of her consolations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and drain to your heart\uc1\u8217*s delight
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the milk of her rich mother-bosom.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For thus says the {\scaps Lord}: Behold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will set prosperity flowing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
towards her, like a river in spate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the wealth of the world like a torrent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your babes shall be borne on the side
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and dandled upon the knees;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}And as one whom his mother comforts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even so will I comfort you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
In Jerusalem you shall be comforted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Your heart shall rejoice at the sight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your bones shall flourish like grass;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and then shall men perceive
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how the {\scaps Lord} loves His Servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and how wroth He can be with His foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For behold, the {\scaps Lord} shall come like a fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with chariots like the whirlwind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to render His anger in burning heat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his rebuke in flames of fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For judgment the {\scaps Lord} will hold on all flesh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by fire and by His sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s slain shall be many.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Those that devote themselves
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by rites of purification
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to (worship in sacred) gardens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with one in the centre to lead them \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
That eat the flesh of swine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of creatures that crawl, and mice \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Their works and their thoughts, says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall come to an end together.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Glory Announced throughout the World: The Complete Restoration and Perpetuity of Israel

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Behold, the time is come
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to gather all nations and tongues;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they shall come and behold My glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}And a sign I will set among them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And those that escape (the judgment)
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will send unto distant coasts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
such as have not heard of My fame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor yet have seen My glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They shall tell to the nations My glory;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}And out of all the nations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall all your brethren bring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
unto My holy Mountain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to Jerusalem, says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as an offering unto the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the offerings brought to the Temple
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by Israel in vessels pure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Some I will also take,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for Levitical priests, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For as surely as the heavens
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth I create anew
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall abide, says the {\scaps Lord}, before Me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your name and your race shall continue.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fearful Fate of the Apostates

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}From one new moon to another,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
one Sabbath to another,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
shall all flesh come to worship
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before Me, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}And forth they shall go, and look
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the corpses of the men
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that have rebelled against Me \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Whose worm never dies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose fire is never quenched:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They are held by all flesh in abhorrence.
\par}

}