{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Jeremiah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Call and Early Visions

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Call

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The messages of Jeremiah, the son of Hilkiah, amember of the priestly order resident in Anathoth inthe district of Benjamin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}A message came to him from Jehovah in thethirteenth year of the reign of Josiah, the son of Amon,king of Judah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and (such messages) continued tocome to him in the days of Jehoiakim, the son ofJosiah, king of Judah, and up to the end of theeleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king ofJudah, when in the fifth month the people ofJerusalem were swept into exile.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}This is the message that came to me from Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}"My thoughts were upon thee before I created thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And before thou wast born I had set thee apart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And appointed thee unto the nations a prophet."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And thus I made answer:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Alas! O Lord Jehovah, Behold!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have no skill of speech, I am only a child."
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then Jehovah made answer to me:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Do not plead thou art still but a child,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou must go wheresoever I send thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And say whatsoever I bid thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Be not afraid at the sight of them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 2 For I will be with thee to save thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thus spoke Jehovah; then with His outstretched hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He touched my mouth and said to me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Herewith do I put My words in thy mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Behold this day do I give thee authority
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Over the nations and over the kingdoms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To uproot and demolish, destroy and tear down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To upbuild and to plant."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Reassuring Vision of the Almond Tree

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This further message came to me from Jehovah:"What seest thou there, Jeremiah?" (said the Voice).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}"A branch of an almond tree," I answered. "Thouhast seen truly," said Jehovah," for I am watchingover My purpose, to perform it."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Vision of the Caldron of War

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then there came to me a second message fromJehovah. "What seest thou now?" (said theVoice). "A boiling pot," I answered, "facing thenorth."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Jehovah said to me:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the north shall disaster break forth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Over all that inhabit the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For I, saith Jehovah, do summon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The northern kingdoms all;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Each king shall come and set his throne
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At the gates that lead into Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And against her encircling walls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And against all the cities of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will utter My judgments against them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of their wickedness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Me they have forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And to to other gods offered sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And bowed to the work of their hands.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Divine Summons and the Divine Assurance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As for thee, gird up thy loins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Arise and declare unto them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whatsoever I command thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let the sight of them not dismay thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Else I will dismay thee before them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As for Me, behold! This day
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a fortified city I make thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A pillar of iron, a wall of bronze,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Against the whole of the land\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The kings and the courtiers of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The priests and the folk of the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They will fight thee, but thou shalt be victor:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For I \uc1\u8211* saith Jehovah most solemnly\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will be with thee to save thee.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Earlier Messages of Jeremiah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Ancient Fidelity and Happiness

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}There came to me this message from Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Go and proclaim in the hearing of Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I remember the love of thy youth\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An affectionate bride wast thou\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When thou followedst Me in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A land that was all unsown;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Israel belonged to Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His first-fruits, sacred to Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Whosoever devoured her was punished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On such did disaster fall.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Long Record of Infidelity with its Bitter Consequences

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Her Ingratitude and Unparalleled Apostasy

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Hear the word of Jehovah, O household of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all ye families of the household of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What wrong did your fathers discover in Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That they went from Me afar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To follow after vanities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Till they, too, became a vanity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And never sought after Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who brought them up out of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And led them through the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A land of steppes and pits,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A land of drought and gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A land that no man traversed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A land where no man dwelt?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And I brought you into a garden-land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To enjoy its fruits and its good things:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But ye came and defiled My land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And made Mine inheritance loathsome,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}No priest was heard any more
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Enquiring after Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They that handle the law did not know Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The rulers rebelled against Me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The prophets spoke by Baal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And followed useless idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I must therefore contend with you still,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And with your children\uc1\u8217*s children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Pass across to the isles of Cyprus,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or send afar unto Kedar;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Note carefully, and see,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath there ever been aught like this?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Hath ever a nation exchanged its gods,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Though they be no gods at all?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But My people hath exchanged
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their Glory for useless idols.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Be appaled at this, ye heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And shudder exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For My people, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Have done two evil things:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Me they have forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Fountain of Living Water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To hew for themselves leaking cisterns,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That can hold no water at all.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Consequences of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Apostasy

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Is Israel a servant?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or is he a home-born slave?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why then hath he fallen a prey?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And why are his cities wasted?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Young lions have roared against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And lifted up their voice;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have made his land all desolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And no man dwelleth therein.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yea, the people of Memphis and Daphnae
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Have shorn the crown of thy head;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And is this not come upon thee
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Through forsaking Jehovah thy God?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now why dost thou wander to Egypt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And drink the waters of Nile?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And why dost thou go to Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To drink of the streams of Euphrates?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Thy defection shall bring thee pain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thy wickedness sore reproof;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou shalt know and see for thyself
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What a bitte thing it is
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To forsake Jehovah thy God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And to cherish no awe of Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saith the Lord Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Devotion to Idolatry

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For of old thou didst break thy yoke,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And burst thy bonds in sunder;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou saidst, "I refuse to serve:"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But high upon every hill
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And under every green tree
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou didst stretch thee, playing the harlot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yet I as a choice vine had planted thee\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Sound was thy stock altogether;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But now art thou turned to be bitter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou wild degenerate vine!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For though thou shouldst wash thee with soda,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And take thee abundance of soap,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet the Lord, as He seeth thy guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall declare it of deepest dye.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}How canst thou say, "All stainless am I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have not gone after the Baals"?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Look at thy way in the Valley,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And know what thou hast done.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A swift young camel art thou,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That courseth hither and thither,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}A heifer run wild in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Aglow with the heat of ther passion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That sniffeth the wind in her longing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And who can turn her back?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No one need wearily seek her\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In her month she is sure to be found.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Run not the shoes off thy feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And spare thy throat, lest it parch.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But thou saidst,"There is no hope \uc1\u8211* none:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For I am in love with strangers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And after them will I go."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Impotence of the Gods solicited by Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But Israel\uc1\u8217*s house shall be shamed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a thief that is caught is ashamed\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They and their kings and their princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their priests and their prophets together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}That say to a stock, "My father,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To a stone, "It is thou that hast borne me."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For unto Me they turned
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their backs and not their faces;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet in time of trouble they say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "O rise Thou up and save us."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But where are the gods thou didst make thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let them arise, if they
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Can save thee in time of trouble;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For as many as are thy cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So many thy gods, O Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Why do ye wrangle with Me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For wicked ye are, every man of you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Rebels are ye, saith Jehovah\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Rebels against Me, each man of you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}In vain have I smitten your children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They would not receive correction;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The sword hath devoured your prophets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a lion that dealeth destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And yet ye are unafraid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So hear ye the word of Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Have I been a desert to Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A dark and gloomy land?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why then do ye say, "We are free,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 We will come unto Thee nevermore?"
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Can a maid forget her ornaments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or a bride forget her sash?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet Me hath My people forgotten
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Days and days without number.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}In quest of love how bravely
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou trippest along thy way!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Small wonder thy deeds are so vile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thy way hath been all polluted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Yea, blood was found in thy skirts\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of the lives of the innocent poor\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As though thou hadst caught them at theft!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For all this (I would therefore contend with thee);
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Yet thou hast said: "I am innocent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Surely His anger is over."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But see, I will enter with thee into judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because thou dost claim to be sinless.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Why runnest thou hither and thither
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With so frivolous a heart?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou shalt yet reap shame from Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As thou has reaped shame from Assyria.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Yea, thence shalt thou also go forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With thy hands upon thy head;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For those whom thou trustest Jehovah hath spurned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thou shalt not make good thine escape.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Judah the Faithless

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}If a man divorceth his wife,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And she goeth away from him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And becometh the wife of another,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Can she ever again be his?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is such a woman as she
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Not altogether polluted?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But thou hast played the harlot
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With many and many a lover;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And canst thou dare to dream
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of returning to Me, saith Jehovah?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Lift up thine eyes to the heights, and behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Where hast thou not been ravished?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou hast waited for them by the ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a Bedouin in the desert;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou hast stained the land by thy whoredoms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And by thy wicked ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And through thy many lovers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou hast let thyself be snared.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou hast a harlot\uc1\u8217*s forhead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Refusing to be abashed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet but now has been calling Me Father
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Comrade of thy youth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}"Can He keep His anger for ever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or cherished it to the end?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yes, such were thy words; but they deeds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the last degree were vile.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Judah\uc1\u8217*s Infidelity more Awful than Israel\uc1\u8217*s

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In the days of the King Josiah Jehovah said to me:"Hast thou seem what backsliding Israel did? Shewent up on every high mountain and under everygreen tree and there she played the harlot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I hadhoped that, after all this, she would return to Me. Butno! she did not return. Her faithless sister Judah{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}saw that I had put backsliding Israel away because ofher adultery, and that I had given her a bill of divorce;nevertheless faithless Judah was not at all afraid, butshe too went and played the harlot,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}defiling the landby her wanton whoredom, and committing adulterywith stones and stocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nevertheless, when faithlessJudah turned to Me, it was not with her whole heart,but only in pretence."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Offer of Pardon and Promise of Glory

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then Jehovah said to me, "Backsliding Israel hasjustified herself more than faithless Judah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Go andproclaim these words towards the north and say:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 O backsliding Israel, turn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will not look in anger upon thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I am kind, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I keep not Mine anger for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But only acknowledge thy guilt\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That, disloyal to Jehovah thy God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou hast lavished thy love upon strangers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Beneath every spreading tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And unto My voice, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou hast not inclined thine ear.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Return, ye backsliding children, saith Jehovah,for I am your husband and lord; and I will takeone of you from each city and two from each clan,and I will bring you to Zion,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and give you rulers afterMy own mind, who shall tend you with wisdom andskill.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And when in those days you have grownnumerous and fruitful in the land, saith Jehovah, menshall speak no more of the ark of the covenant ofJehovah; it shall never enter their minds, they willneither think of it nor miss it, nor will they ever againmake another.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At that time Jerusalem shall be called the Throneof Jehovah, and all the nations shall gather thereto;they shall follow no more the stubbornness of theirevil hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}In those days the household of Judahshall join the household of Israel, and together theyshall come from the north land to the land that I gaveyour forefathers for an inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Penitent Return will be met by the Divine Acceptance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}How glad, methought, shall I be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To give thee a place among sons,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To give thee a pleasant land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An inheritance passing fair!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Me thought ye would call Me Father,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And follow Me evermore;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But ye have been false unto Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a woman is false to her lover.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Hark! weeping is heard on the heights\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It is suppliant Israel crying,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because they have walked perversely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Forgetting Jehovah their God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}"Return, ye backsliding I will heal."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Behold, we are come unto Thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Thou art Jehovah our God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The hills are but a delusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the orgies upon the mountains;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In Jehovah our God alone
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is Israel\uc1\u8217*s salvation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The Baal hath devoured the toil
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of our fathers from our youth\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their sheep and their oxen together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their sons and their daughters together
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}We would lay us down in our shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All covered with confusion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For before our God we have sinned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 We and our fathers from youth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Even unto this very day;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And we have not hearkened at all
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the voice of Jehovah our God."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}"O Israel, if thou wilt return," saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 If thou but return unto Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And put out of My sight those things that I loathe;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 If thou roam not hither and thither;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If sincerely and justly and truly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou swear, \uc1\u8217*As Jehovah liveth,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Then nations shall pray for a blessing like thine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And in thee shall they make their boast.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For thus saith Jehovah to the citizens of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And to them that dwell in Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Break up the ground that lies fallow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And sow ye not among thorns;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Circumcise ye your own selves to Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Remove from your hearts the foreskin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ye citizens of Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And ye that dwell in Jerusalem;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lest My fury go forth like fire
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And blaze beyond all quenching,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of your evil doings."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Impending Judgment to be Executed by a Foreign Invader

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Declare ye this message in Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And publish it in Jerusalem;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Blow the trumpet throughout the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Cry aloud and say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Gather and let us betake ourselves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Into the fortified cities."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Lift towards Zion a signal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Flee ye for safety and stay out;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For disaster and fell destruction
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I soon will bring out the north.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A lion hath gone from his thicket;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Devastator of nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hath left and gone forth from his place
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To desolate the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Gird yourselves therefore with sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Make ye lament and wail;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the fierce glowing wrath of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Doth turn not away nor leave us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The heart of the king and the princes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall fail int that day, saith Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The priests shall be seized with horror,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the prophets with amazement.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They shall say "Ah, Lord Jehovah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ah! Surely Thou hast deluded
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 This people and Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Assuring us all would be well,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 While the doth pierce to the soul."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This message shall then be declared
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To Jerusalem and this people:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A glowing wind from the desert
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Cometh straight upon My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But not to winnow or cleanse\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Too keen is the blast for that.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So now I will utter My judgment upon them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Behold! he mounteth as clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His chariots are like to the whirlwind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His horses are swifter than eagles:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Woe unto us! we are spoiled."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Wash thy heart of wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jerusalem, that thou mayest be saved:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How long wilt thou harbour within thee
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thine evil imaginations?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Hark! a message from Dan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From Mount Ephraim, evil tidings;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Proclaim it among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And publish it over Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Behold! leopards are coming
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From a land that is far away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They are raising loud their roar
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Against the cities of Judah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Lying in wait in the fields,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They beset her round and round\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Because," declareth Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "She hath rebelled against Me."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Thy doings and thy behaviour
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Have brought these things upon thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 This is the fruit of thy wickedness\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Bitter indeed it is,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It pierceth thy very heart.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Anguish

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O the pain, the pain in my bosom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The walls of my heart are athrob:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My heart is a tumult within me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I cannot hold my peace;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the sound of the trumpet I hear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The din and alarum of battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Ruin doth break upon ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For all the land is laid waste;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My tents of a sudden are spoiled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yea, all in a moment my curtains.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}How long must I look on the standard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And hear the sound of the trumpet?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For foolish is my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And me they do not know;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Sottish children they are,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Devoid of understanding:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Wise are they to do evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But they know not how to do good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}I looked at the earth, and behold! it was empty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I looked at the heavens, and their light was gone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}I looked at the mountains, and lo! they were trembling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all the hills moved to and fro.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I looked and looked, but behold, there was no man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all the birds of the heaven had fled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I looked at the fruit-land: behold! it was desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all the cities were fallen in ruins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Laid waste by the fierce hot wrath of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Irrevocable Doom

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For thus Jehovah hath said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The land shall be all desolation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For this the earth shall mourn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the heavens above be black;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I have not repented My words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And I will not turn back from My purpose.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At the noise of the horsemen and bowmen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The whole land taketh to flight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They enter the thickets and caves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They climb up on to the rocks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Abandoned is very city,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And not a man dwelleth therein.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Why, then, dost thou robe thee in scarlet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And deck thee with jewels of gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And paintest thine eyes to enlarge them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In vain dost thou make thyself fair.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They that doted on thee despite thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It is thy life that they seek.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}For a cry have I heard as of woman in travail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A scream as of one bringing forth her first child.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hark! \uc1\u8217*tis the daughter of Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That gaspeth and spreadeth her hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Saying, "Ah! woe is me! I am faint,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I am sinking \uc1\u8211* the victim of murderers."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Universal Corruption of the Nation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Look ye around and examine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Search in her open spaces
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 If ye can find a man\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Any that acteth justly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And seeketh after truth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Then I \uc1\u8211* Jehovah declareth\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Will grant her My forgiveness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But even when they say, "By Jehovah,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are ready to swear to a lie.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Dost Thou look then, Jehovah, on falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And not upon the truth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To all Thy blows they were callous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They refused to accept correction;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their faces were harder than stone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They refused to turn (and repent).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}"But these," thought I, "are the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The people without understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who know not the way of Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The ordinance of their God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I will get me unto the great men,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And unto them will I speak;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they know the way of Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The ordinance of their God."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But these very men have all broken the yoke,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And snapped the bonds asunder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Soon therefore shall they be slain
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By a lion out of the forest;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A wolf from the steppes shall despoil them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A leopard shall lurk by their cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And rend all that issue therefrom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For many are their their transgressions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And far they have turned away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}How then for this can I pardon thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy children have forsaken Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Swearing by gods that are no gods;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And, when to the full I had fed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Adultery they committed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They lodge in the houses of harlots.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Well fed stallions were they,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Neighing each for his neighbour\uc1\u8217*s wife.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And crimes like these, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Am I to leave unpunished?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall not My soul be avenged
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On a nation such as this?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Implacable Doom

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Get ye up to her vines and destroy them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Make an utter end of them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Take away her branches,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For they are not Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For utterly faithless to Me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Are the households of Israel and Judah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They have denied Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And said, "He will never do it;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No evil shall come upon us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 We shall see neither sword nor famine.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The prophets are only wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The word is not in them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So be it done unto them."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Behold, MY word in thy mouth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will make like a flaming fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And this people shall be as the fuel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And it shall clean devour them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Behold, I am bringing against you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O household of Israel, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A nation from afar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 An imperishable nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A very ancient nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A nation whose language thou knowest not,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whose speech is strange unto thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Like an open grave is their quiver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And giants are they all:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They shall eat up thy bread and thy harvest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall eat up thy sons thy daughters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall beat down the fortified cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Wherein thou didst trust, with the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But in those days, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will not make a clean end of you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And in time to come, when ye say to Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Why hath Jehovah our God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Done all these things unto us?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Then shalt thou say unto them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "As ye have forsaken Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And served foreign gods in your land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So ye shall be servants to strangers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In a land that is not your own."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Utter Depravity of the People and their Religious Leaders

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Declare ye this in the household of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And publish this message in Judah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Hear this, ye foolish and senseless people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With eyes that see not, and ears that hear not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Fear ye not Me? saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Tremble ye not at My presence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who hath set the sand as a bound for the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a barrier eternal which cannot be passed?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Its waters may toss, but they cannot prevail;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Its waves may roar, yet they cannot pass over it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But these people are stubborn, defiant in heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are turned aside and gone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For they do not say in their hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Let us fear Jehovah, our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who giveth the rain in its season,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The early and latter rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And into us reserveth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the weeks appointed for harvest."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}This order your sins have disturbed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your crimes have withheld from you blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For among My people are knaves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who set snares and with traps catch men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Like a cage full of birds, so their houses
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Are full of (the gains of) deceit;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And so they grow great and rich,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They are waxen fat, they are sleek:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They run riot in deeds of wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They defend not the rights of the orphan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nor champion the cause of the needy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And things like these, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Am I to leave unpunished?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall not My soul be avenged
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On a nation such as this?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}An appailing, a horrible thing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is come to pass in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The prophets prophesy falsely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And from them do the priests take their teaching,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And My people love it so;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But what will ye do in the end?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Approach of the Invader

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Flee ye for safety, ye Benjamites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Forth from the midst of Jerusalem;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Blow ye the trump in Tekoa,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Raise a beacon on Beth-haccherem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For out of the north there peereth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Disaster and fell destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}As a fair and luxurious mead
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is the height of the daughter of Zion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But shepherds shall come to assail her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They and their flocks together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall pitch their tents around about her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And graze on her, each where he camps.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}"Prepare ye war against her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Up! let us storm her at noon-day."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Alas! for the day declineth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The shadows of evening are lengthening."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}"Then up! let us storm her by night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And her palaces let us destroy."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hew ye down her trees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And cast up a mound against her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Woe to thee, City of Falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Within thee is nothing but tyranny.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As a well keepeth fresh her waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 She keepeth her wickedness fresh;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Within her are rapine and violence heard,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Sickness and wounds are for ever before Me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O Jerusalem, be admonished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lest My soul from thee be severed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lest I make thee a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An uninhabited land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Glean like a vine full thoroughly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Those that are left of Israel;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Set thy hand once more
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a vintager unto the branches."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}"But to whom shall I speak and bear witness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In such wise that they listen?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For see! their ear is uncircumcised,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Helpless are they to hearken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To them is the word of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Become an utter scorn;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They have no pleasure in it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I am filled with the wrath of Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I am weary of holding it back:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On the child in the street I will pour it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On youths, too, where\uc1\u8217*er they assemble;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It shall smite men and women alike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the aged, whose days are many.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Their homes shall be turned unto others,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their fields and their wives together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For against those that dwell in the land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will stretch out My hand, saith Jehovah."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The National Materialism and its Doom

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For great and small alike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are all of them greedy of gain;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Prophet and priest alike\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Every man of them practiseth falsehood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They would heal the hurt of My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As though it were but slight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "It is well, it is well," they say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "When it is anything but well."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Are they at all abashed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At their deeds abominable?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nay, they are unabashed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They know not how to blush.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall therefore fall with the fallen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the hour of their visitation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall stumble, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Thus did Jehovah say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Stand in the ways and see,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And ask for the ancient paths;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Mark that which leadeth to happiness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 See that ye walk therein\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And ye shall find rest to your souls.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But they said, " We refuse to walk in it."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And over you I set watchmen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saying "Hark for the sound of the trumpet."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But they said, "We refuse to hearken."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Wherefore hearken, ye nations, and hear, O earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Take knowledge of that which is coming.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Behold, I will bring on this people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Disaster, the fruits of their backsliding;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they heeded not My words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My instruction they rejected.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Of what avail to Me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is the incense that cometh from Sheba,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And sweet cane from a distant land?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I accept not your burnt-offerings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your sacrifice pleaseth Me not.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore, thus saith Jehovah: Behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will set on the way of this people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Stones over which they may stumble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And over them stumble they shall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Fathers and sons together\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And neighbour and friend shall perish.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Thus saith Jehovah, Behold!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A people doth come from the north land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A mighty nation is stirring
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At the uttermost ends of the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Bow they wield and javelin\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Cruel and pitiless they,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With a voice like the roar of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they ride upon horses and chariots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Arrayed, like one man, for the battle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Against thee, O daughter of Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The rumour thereof we have heard,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all unnerved are we:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Anguish hath seized upon us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And pangs as of women in travail.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Venture not forth to the open,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Go not abroad on the highway;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For there is the sword of the enemy\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Terror on every side.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}O daughter of My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Gird thee about with sackcloth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And sprinkle thee with ashes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Make mourning and bitter lament,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As for an only son;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For suddenly shall come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Devastator upon us.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah as Assayer of the National Character

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}I have set thee to test My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To discover and test their way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Refractory are the all,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They slander as they go;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They are all of them brass and iron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are all of them corrupt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Fiercely the bellows blow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The lead is consumed by the fire;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But in vain doth the smelter keep smelting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The dross is not smelted away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Their name shall be refuse silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For them hath Jehovah as refuse rejected.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Messages from the Middle Period of Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Career

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Salvation lies neither in Temple nor Ritual, but only in Repentance and Reform

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Take thy stand at the gate of the Temple, and theremake the following proclamation. Say, Listen tothis message from Jehovah, all ye men of Judah thatenter these gates to worship Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Thus saithJehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your waysand your doings, and I will guarantee this place as yourpermanent home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But put no trust in lyingmessengers, who say: "This is the Temple of Jehovah, theTemple of Jehovah, the Temple of Jehovah."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For ifyou really amend your ways and your doings: ifyou really do justice as between man and man;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}if you abstain from the oppression of the residentforeigner, the fatherless and the widow, from the sheddingof innocent blood in this place, and from devotionto other gods to your own hurt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}then I will guaranteeyou a home here for all time in the land that I gaveyour forefathers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But see, you are putting your trust in doctrines thatare as profitless as they are false.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What! you committheft, murder, adultery, perjury, you burn sacrificeto the Baal, you run after other gods that arestrange to you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and then you (have the hardihoodto) come and stand before me in this House which iscalled by My name, and say, "Now we are safe" \uc1\u8211* inorder, forsooth, to carry on all these abominations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This House which bears My name you regard, do you,as nothing but a robbers\uc1\u8217* cave? Make no mistake:I \uc1\u8211* saith Jehovah \uc1\u8211* I have not been blind to all this.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I would ask you to visit My sanctuary in Shiloh,where I put My name at the first, and see what thewickedness of My people Israel constrained Me to doto it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And so it will be now, saith Jehovah. Becauseyou have perpetrated all these anormities, in defianceof My most earnest and repeated words, and haverefused to respond to My call,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}therefore this Templein which you repose your trust \uc1\u8211* called by My namethough it be \uc1\u8211* and the place that I gave to you andyour forefathers, I will consign to the same fate asovertook Shiloh;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and I will hurl you out of My sightas I have hurled your brethren, the whole race ofEphraim.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}As for thyself, offer no prayer for this people, raiseno cry or prayer on their behalf, and make no intercessionto Me, for I will not listen to thee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Seest thounot what they are doing in the cities of Judah and inthe streets of Jerusalem?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The children gather wood,the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead dough,to make cakes to the Queen of Heaven, and to pourout drink-offerings to other gods, in order to vex Me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Is it I, then, saith Jehovah, whom they are vexing?is it not rather themselves, doomed as they are tobring confusion upon their own faces?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Therefore,thus saith the Lord Jehovah, "My anger and Myfury shall be poured out upon this place, upon manand beast, upon trees of the field and fruit of the ground,and it shall blaze in unquenchable flame."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel,Put the flesh of your burnt-offerings and your(other) sacrifices together, and make a common mealof them both alike;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}for on the day that I brought yourforefathers out of the land of Egypt, I gave them nocommandment nor did I utter a syllable with regard toburnt offering or sacrifice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But the commandment Igave them was this: Listen, I said, to My voice, andthen I will be your God and you shall be My people,and take My commandments as the standard of allyour life \uc1\u8211* this is the way to prosperity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But, insteadof inclining their ear and listening, they followed thedictates of their own stubborn and wicked hearts; theywent backwards instead of forwards.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Ever since yourforefathers came out of the land of Egypt, every day upto this very day I have been sending you early and lateall My servants the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Instead, however,of inclining their ear, they stiffened their necks andbehaved worse than their forefathers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}This, then, is the message thou art to address tothem, though they will not listen to thee, nor respondto thy call \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}thy message is to be this:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 This is the folk that refused to listen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the voice of Jehovah their God\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That refused to accept correction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Sincerity is vanished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It is found on their lips no more.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fearful Judgment upon Idolatry

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Shear off thy locks \uc1\u8211* away with them\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lift up a dirge on the heights:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah hath spurned and forsaken
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The race that hath roused Him to anger.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The people of Judah, saith Jehovah, have done thething I abhor: the very House that bears My namethey have defiled by introducing into it their abominable{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}worship. They have built a sanctuary of Tophethin the Valley of the son of Hinnom, for the burning oftheir sons and daughters in the fire, though this wasno commandment of Mine \uc1\u8211* such a thing never enteredinto My mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Mark this therefore: days are coming, saith Jehovah,when it shall be no more called Topheth, nor the Valleyof the son of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter, andTopheth shall be used as a burial-place for want ofroom (elsewhere).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The dead bodies of this peopleshall be devoured by the birds of the air and the beastsof the earth, and none shall scare them away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}In thecities of Judah and on the streets of Jerusalem I willstill the voice of mirth and gladness, and the voice ofbridegroom and bride; for the land shall become a waste.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}At the time, saith Jehovah, they shall bring out oftheir graves the bones of the kings, the princes, thepriests, and the prophets, of Judah, and of the inhabitantsof Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and they shall spread thembefore the sun and the moon and all the host of heaven,whom they loved and served and followed and soughtand worshipped; and they shall remain ungatheredand unburied, they shall be for dung on the face of theground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And in all places to which I have driven them,every man that is left of this evil family would chooserather death than life, saith Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The National Refusal to Repent and the Coming Retribution

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Thou shalt say to them, Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Doth not one who has fallen rise up again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And one who hath wandered turn back again?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why, then, doth thy people keep turning
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For ever and ever backward,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Clinging to ways deceitful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Refusing to return?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I have listened with ear intent\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their words are utterly false.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not a man repents of his wickedness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or thinks upon what he has done:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But each rushes on in his course
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a war-horse rushes in battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The very stork in the heavens
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Doth know her appointed seasons;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The turtle, the swift, and the swallow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Observe the time of their coming:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But the ordinance of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My people doth not know.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}How can ye say, "We are wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And with us is the law of Jehovah"?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For see! the false pen of the scribes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath turned it into a falsehood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So the wise shall be put to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be dismayed and taken captive.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have spurned the word of Jehovah\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What manner of wisdom have they?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So their wives I will give unto others,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To conquerors their fields.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For, great and small alike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are all of them greedy of gain;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Prophet and priest alike\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Every man of them practiseth falsehood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They would heal the hurt of My people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As though it were but slight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "It is well, it is well," they say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "When it is anything but well."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Are they at all abashed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At their deeds abominable?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nay, they are unabashed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They know not how to blush.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall therefore fall with the fallen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the hour of their visitation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall stumble, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When I, saith Jehovah, would gather their fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 There is not a grape on the vine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There is not a fig on the fig tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All withered are the leaves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}"Why are we sitting still?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Assemble yourselves together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let us enter the fortified cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And there let us meet our doom;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah our God hath doomed us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath given us gall to drink,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because we have sinned against Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}We wait for peace, but no good cometh;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For a season of healing, but lo! dismay."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}From Dan is heard the snort of his steeds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 At the sound of his stallions neighing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All the land doth tremble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They come and devour the land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all that is therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The city and her inhabitants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For see! I will send amongst you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 serpents of basilik order,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Which cannot be charmed at all;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they, saith Jehovah, shall bite you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Lament over the Sin and the Doom of his people

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Past healing is my sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My heart is heavy within me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Hark! a voice is calling
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the daughter of my people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From a land that is far away:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Is not Jehovah in Zion?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is not her King therein?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "With their images why have they vexed Me\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With futile foreign gods?"
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}"The harvest is past, the summer is ended,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all unsaved are we."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For the daughter of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All broken, mine own heart is broken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I go about in mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With the clutch of horror upon me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Is there no balm in Gilead?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is there no physician there?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why cometh then no healing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the daughter of my people?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}O that my head were waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And mine eyes a fountain of tears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That day and night I might weep
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the slain of the daughter of my people!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}O that I had in the desert
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A spot such as travellers lodge in;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For then would I leave my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yea, from them I would go;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they be all adulterers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A company of traitors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That bend their tongue like a bow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}It is not the true, but the false,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That has mastery in the land;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they pass from evil to evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they know not Me, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let each man beware of his neighbour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And trust not any brother:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For brothers are tricksters, all of them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And neighbours are slanderers all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They all deceive one another,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The truth they will not speak;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have taught their tongue to lie,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They behave like knaves and fools.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Oppression upon oppression,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Deceit upon deceit:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They refuse, saith Jehovah, to know Me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Behold I will smelt them and test them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For alas! I must turn Mine eyes away
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the daughter of My people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their tongue is a deadly arrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The words of their mouth are deceit;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They speak their neighbour fair,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But at heart they are laying a trap for him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And crimes like these, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Am I to leave unpunished?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall not My soul be avenged
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On a nation such as this?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Lift a lament for the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A dirge for the wilderness pastures;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For wasted they lie and untraversed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No lowing of cattle they hear:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The birds of the air and the beasts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Are fled away and gone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will make of Jerusalem ruins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A place for jackals to haunt;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make of the cities of Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An uninhabited waste.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Where is the man that Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Himself hath communed with and charged
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To declare why the land us a ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Laid waste like the untravelled wilderness?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And Jehovah said unto me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because they forsook My law
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Which I had set before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And did not live thereby,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But disobeyed My voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And followed their stubborn hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the Baals that their fathers had taught them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The God of Israel; Behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will feed this people with wormwood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And give them gall to drink.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will scatter them far among nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To them and their fathers unknown;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The sword I will send to pursue them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Until I have clean consumed them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Now mark ye well and summon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The women that chant in dirges;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And send for the skilful women,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That they may come in haste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And lift up for us a lament;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That our eyes may run with tears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And our eyelids gush with water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Hark! from Zion float sounds of wailing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Alas!how are we spoiled;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 We are put to utter shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because we have left the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And our homes are hurled to the ground."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Hear then, ye women, the word of Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Received with your ears the word of His mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And teach this lament to your daughters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Each one to her neighbour this dirge:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}"Death hath climbed up to our windows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And into our palaces entered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 sweeping the child from the streets
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the youth from the broad open spaces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The corpses of men are fallen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like dung on the face of the field;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Or like sheaves behind the reaper,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With none to gather them up."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The True Glory of a Man

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let the wise man not boast of his wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let the strong man not boast of his strength;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let the rich man not boast of his riches,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But in this be the boaster\uc1\u8217*s boast\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In insight and knowledge of Me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As Jehovah, who over the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Doeth kindness and justice and right;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For these are the things that I love.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Necessity for Circumcision of Heart

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Mark this well, saith Jehovah: days are comingwhen I will punish all those that, though circumcised(in flesh) are uncircumcised (in heart) \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Egypt, Judah,Edom, Ammon, Moab, and all those denizens of thewilderness that have the corners of their hair clipped;for while all the nations are uncircumcised, the wholehousehold of Israel is uncircumcised in heart.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Folly of Fearing the Impotent and Unreal Gods of the Heathen

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Listen, O household of Israel, to the word which Jehovahhath spoken to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Learn not the ways of the heathen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And be not dismayed at the signs in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As the heathen are dismayed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For heathen religion is vapour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A tree is cut down in the forest
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And fashioned by craftsman\uc1\u8217*s axe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4a}Adorned with silver and gold\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4b}And fastened with nails and hammers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To keep them from toppling over.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They are altogether dumb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a scarecrow in garden of cucumbers;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Carried they must needs be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For they cannot go of themselves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Be not afraid of them, then,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For they have it not in their power
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To do either good or harm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There is none like Thee, O Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou art great, and great is Thy name in might.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Who should not fear Thee, O King of the nations?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Thee it becometh well;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For among the wise men of the nations all,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And among their kingdoms all,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 There is none that is like unto Thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}One and all, they are senseless and silly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Instructed of gods that are wooden.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}With silver beat fine, brought from Tarshish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And gold that cometh from Ophir\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And wrought by the craftsman and goldsmith,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And robed in blue and in purple\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The work of skilled men are they all\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Jehovah is God indeed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A living God, and a King everlasting;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The earth at His wrath doth tremble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His anger no nation can bear.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He created the earth by His power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He established the world by His wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He stretched out the heavens by His skill.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When He uttereth His voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The waters roar in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And He causeth vapour to rise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the uttermost ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lightnings He made for the rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the wind He brings out of His storehouses.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}How foolish is man with his knowledge!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The goldsmith is shamed by his image;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His idols are delusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}They are an empty mockery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the hour of their trial they shall perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Not such is the Portion of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His God is the Framer of all things:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah of Hosts is His name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Approaching Doom of Exile

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Take up thy pack from the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 (O Jerusalem), that sittest beleaguered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For thus saith Jehovah, Behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 This time I will surely sling out
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The inhabitants of the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And bring them into such straits
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That they shall melt for fear.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Ah! woe is me! I am broken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And smitten very sore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Yes, this is a stroke indeed,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Said I, "and I must bear it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My tent is despoiled and perished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all my cords are broken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My flock is vanished clean.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There is none to stretch my tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or to hang up my curtains more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For the shepherds are foolish grown,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And nothing they care for Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For this cause they have not prospered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all their flock is scattered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Hark! a rumour! behold, it cometh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A mighty uproar from the land of the north,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It shall make of the cities of Judah a waste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A place to be haunted of jackals.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Prayer that Judgment may be Tempered with Mercy

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Well, O Jehovah, I know
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That a man\uc1\u8217*s way lies not with himself;`
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is not in the power of man
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To walk and direct his steps.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When therefore Thou chastenest us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do Thou deal, O Jehovah, in measure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And not in Thine indignation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For so wouldst Thou bring us to nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Pour out Thy wrath on the heathen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That have not cared for Thee\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And on tribes that invoke not Thy name;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jacob they have devoured,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They have desolated his dwelling.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Exhorts the People to be True to the Demands of the Deuteronomic Law

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"Listen to the words of this covenant, and declarethem to the men of Judah and the inhabitants ofJerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Say to them, Thus saith Jehovah, the Godof Israel: Accursed be the man that refuses to listento the words of the covenant{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}with which I charged yourforefathers on the day that I brought them out of thatiron furnace, the land of Egypt. I promised them thenthat, if they obeyed My voice, and conformed to allMy commandments, they should be My people and Iwould be their God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and thus the oath would beestablished that swore to their forefathers \uc1\u8211* to give thema land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day."Then I answered and said, "Amen, Jehovah."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jehovah then said to me, "Make this proclamationthroughout the cities of Judah and in the streets ofJerusalem: Listen to the words of this covenant andact upon them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For early and late, ever since the daythat I brought your forefathers out of the land ofEgypt up to this day, I have been earnestly adjuringthem to listen to My voice;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}but instead of obedientlyinclining their ear, every man of them followed thedictates of his own wicked and stubborn heart; so Ibrought upon them all the threats of this covenantwhich I had charged them to observe, but which theyfailed to observe."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Further Jehovah said to me, "The people of Judahand the inhabitants of Jerusalem have been engaged ina manifest conspiracy (against Me).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They havereverted to the sins of their forefathers who refused tolisten to My words, and they are actually indulging inthe worship of other gods: the households of Israeland Judah alike have broken the covenant I made withtheir forefathers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore thus saith Jehovah:Mark this \uc1\u8211* I will bring upon them a disaster which theyshall be powerless to escape; and when they cry to Me, Iwill turn a deaf ear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the cities of Judah and theinhabitants of Jerusalem shall go and cry to the gods towhom they burn sacrifice; but no help shall they getfrom them in the day of their calamity:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}for your gods,O Judah, are as numerous as your cities; and asnumerous as the streets of Jerusalem are the altars youhave set up for sacrifice in the scandalous worshipof the Baal.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As for thyself, offer no prayer for this people, raiseno cry or prayer on their behalf; for I will not listedwhen they call to Me in the day of their calamity.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}What business hath My Beloved
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In My house, after conduct so vile?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall vows and the sacred flesh
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Avert from thee thy doom
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Then mightest thou rejoice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}A spreading, graceful olive
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah had called thy name;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But to the roar of a mighty storm
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He hath set it ablaze with lightning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the branches thereof are marred.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For Jehovah of Hosts that planted thee hath pronouncedevil against thee in requital for the evil in whichthe households of Israel and Judah have vexatiouslyindulged, by burning sacrifice to the Baal."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Plot against Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Life

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The plot

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I knew \uc1\u8211* for Jehovah had told me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And revealed to me what they were doing:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But I \uc1\u8211* like an innocent lamb
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That is led to the slaughter was I.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, all unconscious was I
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of the plots they were plotting against me\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To ruin the tree with its sap,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the land of the living to root me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And banish my name out of mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But Jehovah of Hosts, Thou righteous Judge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who mind and heart dost prove,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let me see Thy vengeance upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For on Thee have I rolled my cause.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore, thus saith Jehovah concerning the men of
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Anathoth who seek thy life and threaten thee with
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 death at their hands, if thou preach in the name of
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Behold I will visit them sternly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their young men shall die by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their sons and their daughters shall perish with hunger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Not one of them shall be left;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For over the men of Anathoth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Calamity I will bring
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the year of their visitation.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Perplexity and Prayer for Vengeance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}"Righteous art thou, O Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I make my plaint unto Thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yet the case I would reason with Thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why do the wicked prosper?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And why do the faithless all flourish?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thou plantest them, yea, they take root;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They spread, yea, they bring forth fruit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You are always on their lips,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But far, far away from their hearts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Thou, O Jehovah, dost know me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My heart towards Thee Thou hast proved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Pull them out, then, like sheep for the slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the day of slaughter devote them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}How long must the land still mourn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the herbs of the fields be all withered?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Beast and bid are vanished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of the sin of her people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who think God is blind to their ways."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Divine Answer

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}"If thy race with the footmen hath wearied thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How wilt thou vie with the horse?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If thou takest to flight in a land that is safe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Then how wilt thou do on the jungle of Jordan?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For thy father\uc1\u8217*s household, thine own very brethren,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Even they have played thee false.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They pursue thee with clamours loud:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Trust them not, when they speak thee fair."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Lament over the Havoc wrought upon Judah by her Neighbours

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Havoc

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}My house I have forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My heritage I have cast off;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Into the hands of her foes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have given the Beloved of My soul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}My darling is grown to Me (fierce)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a lion in the jungle;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 She hath lifted her voice against Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And therefore I abhor her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Is My darling a speckled bird,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That the birds circle round and assail her?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Come, all ye beasts of the field,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Come hither to devour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Shepherds many have ruined My vineyard,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And trampled My ground under foot;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have turned My pleasant inheritance
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Into a desolate wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They have made it a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It mourneth, ah me! all desolate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Desolate all is the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But no one cares.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Upon all the bare heights in the wilderness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Spoilers have descended;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the sword of Jehovah devours
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From one end of the land to another;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No peace is there for any.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Wheat they have sown, but thorns they have reaped;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their labour hath profited nothing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their harvest shall bring them to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s hot anger.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This is the word of Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To all Mine evil neighbours
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That put forth a hand on the heritage
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I gave to My people Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Behold! I will pluck them away from their land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the household of Judah I pluck from the midst of them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But when thus I have plucked them away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will once more take pity upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And bring each man back to his heritage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Each to his own land again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And if ever they master the ways of My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To swear by My name, "As Jehovah liveth,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As they once taught My people to swear by the Baal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall then be built up in the midst of My people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the nation that will not listen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will pluck clean away and destroy, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Parable of the Waistcloth

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Jehovah told me to go and buy a linen waistcloth andput it on my loins, taking care not to let it get intowater.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So I bought a waistcloth, as Jehovah hadbidden me, and I put it on my loins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then a second message from Jehovah came to me,telling me{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}to take the waistcloth I had bought, thatwas on my loins, and to proceed to Parah and bury itthere in a chink of the rock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So I went and buried itat Parah, as Jehovah had charged me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Many daysafter, Jehovah told me to proceed to Parah and removethe waistcloth which He had charged me to bury there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then I went to Parah and dug out and took the linenwaistcloth from the place where I had buried it; andlo! the waistcloth was ruined \uc1\u8211* it was good fornothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then there came to me this word from Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thus saith Jehovah, Ruin like this I will bring upon thesoaring pride of Judah and Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}As for thesedepraved people who, refusing to listen to My words,follow the dictates of their own stubborn hearts andindulge in the worship and service of other gods \uc1\u8211* letthem become like this waistcloth, good for nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For, as the waistcloth clings to a man\uc1\u8217*s loins, so wouldI have had the whole household of Israel and Judahcling unto Me, saith Jehovah, to be My people, asource of renown and praise and glory: but they wouldnot listen.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Parable of the Jars

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Take to them therefore this message: Thus saithJehovah the God of Israel, "Every jar must be filled withwine." And if they say to thee, "Why, of course weknow that every jar must be filled with wine,"{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}then thisis what thou shalt say to them: Thus saith Jehovah:Soon \uc1\u8211* mark it well \uc1\u8211* I will fill with drunkenness allthe inhabitants of this land \uc1\u8211* the kings that sit uponthe throne of David, the priests, the prophets, and allthe inhabitants of Jerusalem;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and I will dash them,saith Jehovah, one against another, fathers and sonstogether. I will neither spare nor pity: no compassionshall restrain Me from destroying them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Tender Solemn Warning

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}O hear and give ear, be not haughty;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah hath spoken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To Jehovah your God give ye glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Before it grows dark,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And ere yet, on the mountains of twilight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With feet that are stumbling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ye look for the light, which to gloom
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thick darkness He turneth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But should ye refuse to give heed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Then in secret my soul shall weep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of your pride:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And with tears that flow ever and ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Mine eyes shall run down
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the flock of Jehovah, afar
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To captivity taken.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Lament on the Approaching Fate of King Jehoiachin and the Queen Mother

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Say to the King and the Queen Mother,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Low ye be seated;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For down from your head hath been hurled
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your glorious crown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The towns in the south land are shut,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 There is no one to open them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All Judah is swept into exile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Swept all into exile.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Lament over the Sin and the Doom of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Jerusalem, lift up thine eyes and behold
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How they come from the north.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Where is thy beautiful flock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Even the sheep that were given thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}What wilt thou say when He calleth\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To lord over thee\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The men thou thyself didst instruct
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To approach thee as lovers?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall anguish not clutch at thee hard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As of woman in travail?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But if in thy heart thou shouldst say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Why is this come upon me?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thy manifold guilt is the cause
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That thy skirts are stripped off
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thy modesty outraged.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Can the African change his skin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or the leopard his spots?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Just as helpless art thou to do good
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That art wont to do evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And so to the winds of the desert
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like stubble that flies I will scatter them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}This is thy lot, this the portion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I measure to thee, saith Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because thou forgattest Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And hast trusted in falsehood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Thy skirt I Myself will lift over thy face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That thy shame may be seen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Thine adulteries and thy neighings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy harlotry foul\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the field, on the hills, I have seen\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy detestable doings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How long time yet must pass
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Until thou be cleansed?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Grievous Drought and the Thoughts it Awakened in the Prophet

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Distress of the Drought

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}The message which came from Jehovah to Jeremiah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with regard to the drought.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Judah doth mourn, and the gates thereof languish;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 (Her people) are sitting in black on the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And a cry rises up from Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Her nobles have sent their attendants for water;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They come to the cisterns, no water they find:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Back then they go with their pitches empty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In shame and confusion they cover their heads.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Dismayed are the men that till the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because on the land no rain hath fallen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The ploughmen cover their heads in confusion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yea, even the hind in the field forsaketh
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The young that she bore, because grass there is none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the wild asses stand on the bleak bare heights,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Panting for air, like the crocodile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the light dieth out of their eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because herbage there is none.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Supplication

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And yet though our sins rise in witness against us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah, O act, for Thine own name\uc1\u8217*s sake;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For many a time have we turned from Thee back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And against Thee we have sinned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O Thou that art Israel\uc1\u8217*s Hope,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her Saviour in time of trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why like a stranger art Thou in Thy land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a traveller who turneth to lodge but a night?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Why shouldst Thou be like a man fast asleep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a warrior powerless to save?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet Thou, O Jehovah, art here in our midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By thy name we are called: O leave us not.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Divine Answer

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Touching this people Jehovah thus answered:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thus do they love to wander
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With unrestrained feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But Jehovah cannot accept them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their guilt He now calleth to mind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their sins He will visit with chastisement.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And Jehovah said to me: Offer no prayer for thewelfare of this people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When they fast, I will be deafto their cry; when they offer burnt-offerings andcereal offerings, I will not accept them. By sword,by famine, by pestilence, I will consume them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Remonstrance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}To this I made answer: Oh! Lord Jehovah, see!The prophets are ceaselessly telling them that they willnever see the sword or suffer from famine, but thatThou wilt bestow upon them stable peace in this place.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Divine Answer

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Jehovah said to me: The prophets are butpreaching lies in My name. I never sent them; theyhave no commission from Me; not a word have Ispoken to them. What thy preach to you is nothingbut a tissue of lying visions and idle divinations andinventions of their own deceitful hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Thistherefore is the message of Jehovah concerning thoseprophets who, without any commission from Me, areceaselessly preaching that this land will never sufferfrom sword or famine: by sword and famine shallthose very prophets themselves be consumed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and thepeople they preach to shall be flung out in the streetsof Jerusalem as victims of sword and famine, and theyshall lie unburied \uc1\u8211* themselves, their wives, their sons,their daughters; for I will pour their wickedness overthem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Lament and Confession

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This is the word thou shalt speak to them:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Mine eyes run down with tears
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By night and day unceasing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the daughters of my people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is broken, grievously broken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With a wound exceeding sore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If to the field I go forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lo, the slain of the sword lie there;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And if into the city I go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lo, there lie the victims of famine:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, prophet and priest alike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All witless, lie crouched on the ground,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Hast Thou utterly cast away Judah?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is Zion grown loathsome to Thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why hast Thou smitten us so,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That we can find no healing?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 We look for peace, but no good cometh:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For a season of healing, but lo! dismay.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}We acknowledge, Jehovah, our wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The guilt of our fathers also;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For we have sinned against Thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For Thy name\uc1\u8217*s sake, O spurn us not,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O shame not Thy glorious throne:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O remember and break out Thy covenant with us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Of the worthless gods of the heathen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is there one that can bring down rain?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Can the sky give showers of itself?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is it not Thou alone that canst do this\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah, our God, whom we wait for?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yea, these things are all Thy creation.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Divine Answer \uc1\u8211* Rejection and Doom

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}Then Jehovah said to me:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though Moses and Samuel stood before Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet no learning of heart could I have for this people;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Away with them out of My sight \uc1\u8211* let them go.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When they ask thee where they shall go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Then say to them, Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To death, those destined to death;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the sword, those doomed to the sword;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To famine, those destined to famine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To exile, those destined to exile.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And I, saith Jehovah, will set over them four kinds(of destroyers) \uc1\u8211* the sword to slay, the dogs to tear,the birds of the air to devour, and the beasts of theearth to destroy;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and I will make them an object ofconsternation to every kingdom in the world, in returnfor all the evil wrought in Jerusalem by Manasseh,the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}O Jerusalem, who will then pity thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who will commiserate thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who will go out of his way
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To enquire how it fareth with thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Thou hast cast Me off, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou ever wentest backward;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So, weary at length of relenting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I stretch out My hand to destroy thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}With winnowing-fork I will winnow thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In every gate of the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make My people childless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And destroy them because of their wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their widows are more in number
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Than the sand of all the seas.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A destroyer I will bring
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Upon mother and suckling at noon-day;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will bring of a sudden upon her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Agitation and dismay.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The mother of seven shall languish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And she shall swoon away;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her sun shall go down in the day-time,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ashamed and abashed shall she be.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the rest of them I will deliver
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the sword in the face of their foes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Passionate Lament

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Alas for me! mother of mine, that bore me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To strive and to struggle with all the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Never lender nor borrower was I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yet one and all they curse me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}To their curses be "Amen, Jehovah,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 If ever I failed to entreat Thee
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For a blessing upon my foes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In their time of distress and disaster.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Is the arm in my shoulder of iron?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or is my brow of brass?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}O Jehovah, remember and visit me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Avenge me of my tormentors;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let not Thine anger tarry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Bethink Thee \uc1\u8211* it is in Thy cause
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That I have been laden with insult.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They spurn Thy words \uc1\u8211* every man of them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But to me is Thy word a delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The very joy of my heart;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I have been called by Thy name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O Jehovah, Thou God of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}No happy seat was mine
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At gatherings of the merry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But lonely I sat, for Thy hand was upon me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With (holy) wrath Thou hast filled me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Oh why is my pain unceasing?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And why is this wound of mine cureless?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like a treacherous brook wilt Thou be unto me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like waters that are unsure?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Divine Answer

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Thus therefore saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If thou turn again, I will restore thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thou shalt be My servant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let thy speech but be noble, not petty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And so thou shalt be My mouthpiece;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They then may turn unto thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But thou shalt not turn unto them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And unto this folk I will make thee
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A fortified wall of bronze.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will fight thee, but thou shalt be victor;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For I will be with thee to save thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And rescue thee \uc1\u8211* thus saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yes, I from the land of the wicked will rescue thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I from the clutch of the cruel will redeem thee.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Predictions of Coming Disaster

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Unutterable Loneliness

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}There came to me this message from Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thou shalt not take thee a wife,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saith Jehovah, the God of Israel;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nor shalt thou have any sons
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or daughters in this place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For thus Jehovah saith
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Concerning the sons and the daughters
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That in this place are born,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And concerning the mothers that bore them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the fathers that begat them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}"A grievous death shall they die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Unburied, unlamented;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like dung on the face of the field shall they be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall perish by sword and famine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 By the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall their corpses be devoured."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The National Doom

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For thus Jehovah saith:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do not enter the house of grief,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nor go to make lament,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And raise for them no wailing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because from this (My) people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have taken away My peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Both great and small in this land shall die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall be unburied, unmourned;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not a man shall gash his body,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or shear his hair for them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}No bread shall be broken for mourners,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To comfort them for the dead;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nor shall cup of consolation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be given for father or mother.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Do not enter the house of feasting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To sit with them, eating and drinking.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The God of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Mark this \uc1\u8211* ye shall live to see it\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 This place I will bring to silence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The voice of mirth and gladness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The voice of bridegroom and bride.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Infidelity which Justifies the Doom

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}After thou hast delivered this message to the people,they will ask thee why Jehovah has doomed them to allthis misery. "What is our guilt," they will say, "andwhat is the sin we have committed against Jehovah ourGod?"{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Tell them then, "Jehovah doth solemnlydeclare: it is because your fathers abandoned Mefor the worship and the service of other gods; yes,they abandoned Me and neglected My law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Andyour own behaviour has been worse than that of yourfathers. See how every man of you is following theimpulses of his own wicked and stubborn heart andrefusing to listen to Me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For this, then, I will hurl youout of this land into a land that is strange to you andyour fathers; and there, day and night, ye shall serveother gods; for no favour shall ye have from Me."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Doom

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Behold, I will send many fishers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And them they shall fish, saith Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And then will I send many hunters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall hunt them down
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From every mountain and hill
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And out of the clefts of the rocks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For Mine eyes are all their ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From My face they are not concealed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their guilt is not hid from Mine eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will therefore requite them double
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For all their guilt and sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In profaning My land with the carcases
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of their detestable idols,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And filling Mine inheritance
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With their abominations.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Ultimate Recognition by the Heathen of Jehovah as the True God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O Jehovah, my strength and my stronghold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My refuge in time of trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To Thee from the ends of the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall nations come and say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Only lies have our fathers inherited,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Empty and useless (idols)."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Shall a man make gods for himself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Which yet are no gods at all?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}See then! I will give them to feel\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 This once I will give them to feel\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The weight of My mighty hand:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And then shall they know that My name is Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Doom

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}The sin of Judah is written
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With pencil of iron;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With diamond point it is graven
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On the tablet of their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On the horns of their altars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}On every green tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On every high hill,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On the heights in the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thy substance and all thy treasures
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As spoil I will give,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In requital for all the sins
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That pervaded thy borders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And then thou shalt slack thy hold
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of the land that I gave thee:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make thee the slave of thy foes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In a land that is strange to thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For a fire in Mine anger is kindled
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That burneth for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Joy and Wisdom of Trust

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Accursed the man that trusteth in man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And maketh flesh his arm,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 While his heart is estranged from Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Like a bare desert shrub shall he be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No destiny fair shall be his;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His home is the scorching wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A salt uninhabited land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But blessed the man that trusteth Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That maketh Jehovah his confidence;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Like a tree shall he be, by the waters planted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That stretcheth its roots out towards the stream,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And is never afraid for the coming of heat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But its leaves are for ever green\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the year of drought untroubled\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And it yieldeth fruit without ceasing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Prayer

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}"The heart is most treacherous of all things,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And sick beyond cure: who can know it?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}"I, Jehovah, am Searcher of hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Tester of thoughts am I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To give each what his doings have earned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To let each reap the fruit of his deeds."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Like a patridge that sitteth on eggs
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That it hath not laid,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is the man that getteth him riches
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In ways unjust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the midst of his days he must leave them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His end shall declare him a fool.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}A glorious throne, set on high from of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is the site where standeth our holy place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}O Jehovah, Thou Hope of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Put to shame shall all be that forsake Thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, they that prove faithless to Thee
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the land shall be put to confusion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because they have forsaken
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Fountain of Living Water.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}"Heal me, Jehovah, and I shall be healed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Save me, and I shall be saved indeed:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Thou art my Praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Mark how they say to me ceaselessly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Where is the word of Jehovah?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Pray, now, let it come to pass.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yet never for this did I urge Thee
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To bring on the evil day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nor ever have longed in my heart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the day of disaster \uc1\u8211* Thou knowest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The words that came forth from my lips
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lie open before Thy face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}O be not a terror to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou Refuge of mine in the day of evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Confusion on them that torment me\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On them, but not on me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Be dire dismay upon them\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On them, but not on me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Bring the day of disaster upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With two-fold destruction destroy them."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Sanctity of the Sabbath

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jehovah commanded me to go and take my stand atthe Benjamin gate, through which the kings of Judahgo in and out, and at all the gates of Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}andthere He charged me to address them as follows: "Yekings of Judah, and all ye citizens of Judah andJerusalem that pass through these gates,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Thus saithJehovah: As ye value you lives, be very careful notto carry a burden or to bring anything of the kindthrough the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}also to carry no load out of your houses on theSabbath day, and to do no work of any kind, but to keepthe Sabbath day holy, as I commanded your forefathers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But instead of obediently inclining their ear, theystiffened their neck; they would have nothing to{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}do with obedience or discipline. If you, however,will give earnest heed to Me, saith Jehovah, andrefrain from bringing loads through the city gates on theSabbath day, if you keep the Sabbath day holy andabstain from work of every kind,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}then kings thatsit upon the throne of David shall enter the gates ofthis city riding on chariots and horses, accompaniedby their princes, the men of Judah, and the citizens ofJerusalem; and the city shall be inhabited for ever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}From the cities of Judah, the neighbourhood ofJerusalem, and the district of Benjamin, from the lowland,the hill country, and the south, men shall cometo the Temple with burnt-offerings and sacrifices,oblations and frankincense, and praise-offerings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}If,however, you refuse to give heed to Me and to keep theSabbath day holy by refraining from carrying burdensthrough the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day,then I will kindle in her gates a fire unquenchable, thatshall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Lesson of the Potter and the Clay

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}Jeremiah received from Jehovah the message whichfollows:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"Rise and go down to the potter\uc1\u8217*s house\uc1\u8211*I have somewhat to say to thee, which I willcommunicate to thee there."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So I went down to thepotter\uc1\u8217*s house: and there he was \uc1\u8211* engaged on apiece of work at the wheel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now, if the thing he wasmaking was spoiled in his hands, he would just shapethe material over again into another such vessel as hehad decided to make.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Thereupon there flashed upon me this message fromJehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}"Cannot I," He said, "deal with you,O household of Israel, like this potter? You arein My hand just like the clay in the potter\uc1\u8217*s hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}At one moment I may decide to pluck up or breakdown and destroy some nation of kingdom;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}butif the nation whose fate I have decreed turn from itswickedness, then I relent and do not execute the doomI had planned for it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}At another moment I maydecide to build up or to plant some nation of kingdom;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but if its behaviour displeases Me, if it refuses to listento My voice, then I will retract the favours I hadintended to confer upon it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now, therefore, make this announcement to the menof Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem, Thus saithJehovah: Beware! I am shaping calamity for you, Iam fashioning plans for your discomfiture. Turn, then,every man of you, from your evil ways, and amend yourlife and behaviour."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But they will say, "No, thereis no hope of that: rather will we follow devices of ourown and yield, every man of us, to the impulses of ourwicked and stubborn hearts."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Thus therefore saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ask any heathen man
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 If he ever heard aught like this?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 An utterly horrible thing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath been wrought by the Virgin of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Doth the white snow vanish from Sirion\uc1\u8217*s crags?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do the rills that flow cold from the hills ever dry?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Yet Me hath My people forgotten;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The gods that they worship are phantoms.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have stumbled upon the way
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ordained for them of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And turned into bypaths
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That never were truly laid.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So their land shall be made a horror\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An everlasting scorn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It shall fill every traveller with horror\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thereat he will shake his head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will scatter them like the sirocco
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Before the face of their foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not My face, but My back, will I show them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the day of their calamity.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Plots against Jeremiah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Plots

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then said they, "Come, let us forge
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A plot against Jeremiah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the priests will not lack for instruction to offer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nor the wise men for counsel to render,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nor the prophet for words to declare.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Come, with the tongue let us smite him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let us watch him in all that he says."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Prayer

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O Jehovah, give heed unto me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And hearken to my contention.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Shall evil be rendered for good
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That a pit they have dug for my life?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Call to mind how I stood before Thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To utter a prayer for their welfare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And to turn Thy fury from them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Abandon Thou therefore their children to famine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Deliver them up to the sword;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let their wives become childless widows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let their men be slain of death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their youths may the sword smite in battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Let a cry ring out from their houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When swiftly Thou bringest the raiders upon them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For a pit they have dug to take me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And snares they have hid for my feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For well, O Jehovah, Thou knowest
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How they plotted against me to slay me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 O pardon not their guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And blot not their sin from Thy sight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let them prostrate be hurled before Thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Deal Thou with them in the time of Thine anger.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Lesson of the Broken Flask and its Consequences for Jeremiah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Breaking of the Flask Symbolical of the Shattering of the Nation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}Then Jehovah commanded me to go and buy apotter\uc1\u8217*s earthenware flask, and, accompanied by a fewelders of the people and a few priests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}to proceedto the Valley of the son of Hinnom by the entry of thePotsherd gate, and there announce the message withwhich He would charge me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And the message wasthis: "Listen, ye kings of Judah, and ye citizens ofJerusalem, to what Jehovah is about to say: Thussaith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel: Markthis well. I will soon bring such a catastrophe uponthis place as will make the ears of all who hear of ittingle;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}because they have forsaken Me anddenationalised this place by their burnt-offerings to othergods, strange alike to them and their forefathers;and the kings of Judah have filled this place with theblood of innocent men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They have built Baalsanctuaries to burn their sons in the fire as offerings toBaal, though this was no commandment of Mine \uc1\u8211* sucha thing never entered into My mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Mark this,therefore: days are coming, saith Jehovah, when thisplace shall be no more called Topheth, nor the Valleyof the son of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and I will spill upon the ground the wisdom of Judahand Jerusalem in this place. I will lay them low bythe sword of their enemies and by the hands of thosethat seek their life: their dead bodies I will give to thebirds of the air and the beasts of the earth to devour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And I will make this city a horror and a scorn; allthat pass by her shall be filled with horror and with{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}scorn at all the blows that I shall rain upon her. Iwill drive them to eat the flesh of their sons anddaughters: in the stress of the siege to which they shallbe reduced by their enemies and by those that seektheir life, they will devour one another.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then thou shalt break the flask in the presence ofthe men that accompany thee,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and thou shalt say tothem, Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts: This is how I willshatter this people and this city, just as a potter\uc1\u8217*sjar is shattered beyond all possibility of repair; andTopheth shall be used as a burying-place for want ofroom (elsewhere).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This is how I will deal, saithJehovah, with this place and its inhabitants \uc1\u8211* I will{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}make this city like Topheth; and the houses ofJerusalem and of the kings of Judah shall be, like theplace of Topheth, defiled \uc1\u8211* all the houses, that is,from whose roofs the smoke of sacrifice has ascendedto the host of heaven, and drink-offerings have beenpoured out to other gods.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jeremiah Put in the Stocks for his Preaching

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Jeremiah returned from Topheth to whichJehovah had sent him on his prophetic errand; and,taking his stand in the Temple court he thus addressedthe assembled people:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}"Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,the God of Israel, Mark this well; soon I will bringupon this city and upon all her villages the full measureof disaster with which I have threatened her, becausethey have stiffened their necks and refused to listento My words."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}Now when Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest,who had the general supervision of the Temple, heardthis prophetic utterance of Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}he beat himand put him in the stocks that were at the upperBenjamin gate in the Temple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Next day, afterPashhur had released Jeremiah from the stocks,Jeremiah said to him, "Thy name is (henceforth)changed from Pashhur to Terror.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For thus saithJehovah: See! I will make thee a terror to thyselfand to all thy friends. They shall fall by the enemy\uc1\u8217*ssword, and thou shalt see it with thine own eyes. Iwill give the whole of Judah into the hands of theking of Babylon, and he shall carry them to exile inBabylon and slay them with the sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And all theresources of this city, all her wealth, all that she prizes,all the treasures of the kings of Judah, I will deliverinto the hands of their enemies, who shall despoil themand carry them off to Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}As for thee, Pashhur,thou and all who share thy home shall be swept intocaptivity. To Babylon thou shalt come; therethou shalt die, and there shalt thou be buried \uc1\u8211* thouand all the friends to whom thou hast prophesied lies."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Irresistible Impulse to Preach

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 What it Cost

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}O Jehovah, Thou hast beguiled me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And I let myself be beguiled;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Too strong for me art Thou,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Thou hast won the victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All the day long am I ridiculed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Every one mocketh at me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Every word that I utter is laughed at;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Wronged" and "despoiled" must I cry.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For to me is the word of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An endless reproach and derision.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When I vow to put it out my mind
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And to speak in His name no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It doth burn in my heart like a fire
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shut up within my bones;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I am weary of enduring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I can bear it no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For I hear their many whispers\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A terror on every side\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Denounce him." "Yes, we will denounce him."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "All ye his familiar friends,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Keep a narrow watch for his stumbling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Perchance he will be beguiled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And we shall prevail against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And take our vengeance upon him."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Sense of Divine Support

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Jehovah Himself is with me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As a mighty One and a terrible;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So my persecutors shall stumble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall not prevail;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But because they have dealt unwisely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall come to utter shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To perpetual confusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Which never shall be forgotten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}O Jehovah that triest the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That mind and heart dost behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let me see Thy vengeance upon them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For on Thee have I rolled my cause.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Sing to Jehovah, sing praise to Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For He hath delivered the soul of the needy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the hand of evildoers.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Despair

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}A curse on the day whereon I was born,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Unblest be the day that my mother bore me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}A curse on the man who announced to my father
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "A man child is born to thee" \uc1\u8211* making him glad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Let the fate of that man be the fate of the cities
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O\uc1\u8217*erthrown by Jehovah in pitiless anger;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let him hear in the morning a cry (of distress)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And at noon the alarum of war:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}That he slew me not in the womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So my mother had been my grave,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And her womb had been great for ever.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}O why came I forth from the womb
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To behold but labour and sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That my days should be wasted with shame?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Warns King Zedekiah that the Babylonians will Capture Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah,when King Zedekiah sent the following request to himthrough Pashhur, the son of Malchiah and Zephaniah,the son of Maaseiah the priest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"Be good enough," theysaid, "to enquire of Jehovah on our behalf: forNebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon is fighting againstus. Perhaps Jehovah will so deal with us in His ownwonderful way that the siege will be raised."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}To the deputation Jeremiah replied: "Take thisanswer back to Zedekiah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Thus saith Jehovah, theGod of Israel: Now you are able to fight outside thewall with the king of Babylon and the Chaldeans whoare besieging you; but soon I will drive you with theweapons you handle inside this city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And I myselfwill fight against you with outstretched hand andmighty arm \uc1\u8211* in anger, in fury, and in towering wrath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yes, I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both manand beast, with a great and deadly pestilence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Thereafter, saith Jehovah, Zedekiah, king of Judah and hisministers and the people in this city that survive thepestilence, sword and famine, I will deliver into thehands of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and intothe hands of their enemies, and into the hands of thosethat seek their life; and they shall smite them withthe edge of the sword without mercy, compassion, orpity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}To the people thy message shall be this. Thus saithJehovah: See! I set before you the way of life and theway of death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Whoever remains in this city shall dieby sword, famine, or pestilence; but whoever goes outand surrenders to the Chaldeans that besiege you shallbe spared, though he shall escape with nothing buthis life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For, saith Jehovah, I have set My face againstthis city for evil and not for good; into the hands of theking of Babylon it shall be given, and he shall burn itwith fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}To the royal house of Judah thy message shall bethis.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hear ye the word of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}O household of David, thus saith Jehovah:In the morning give righteous judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Deliver the man that is plundered
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the clutch of his oppressor:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lest My fury break forth like fire
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And blaze unquenchably,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of your evil doings.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Behold, I am against thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou denizen of the vale
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the rock of the plain, saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ye who say, \uc1\u8217*Who can come down against us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And find his way into our lairs?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will punish you, saith Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The fruit of your deeds ye shall reap:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will kindle a fire in her forest
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Which round and round will devour."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Judgment on the Kings of Judah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Solemn Warning

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}Jehovah commanded me to go down to the palaceof the king of Judah and there deliver the followingmessage:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}O king of Judah that sittest on the throne ofDavid, listen to the word of Jehovah \uc1\u8211* thou and thyministers and thy people who enter these gates.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Thus saith Jehovah: Conduct your administration onprinciples of justice and right, deliver the victimsof exploitation from the clutch of the oppressor, refrainfrom all wrong and violence to the resident foreigner, thefatherless and the widow, and shed no innocent bloodin this place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}If you carry out this policy faithfully,then kings upon the throne of David shall pass throughthe gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses\uc1\u8211*they, their ministers and their people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But if youignore this message (of Mine), then, saith Jehovah, Isolemnly swear that this house shall be laid in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For thus saith Jehovah concerning the palace of theking of Judah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though thou art to Me as Gilead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or the (thick-wooded) summit of Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will turn thee into a desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An uninhabited city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will dedicate men to destroy thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Every one with his weapons;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall fell thy choicest cedars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And hurl them into the fire.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The people of many nations, as they pass by this city,shall ask one another why Jehovah has dealt thus withthis great city,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and they shall answer: It is becausethey abandoned their covenant with Jehovah theirGod and gave themselves up to the worship and serviceof other gods.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 On Jehoahaz

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Weep not for him that is dead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And mourn not for him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But weep rather for him that is gone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For he cometh no more:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the land of his birth he shall see
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nevermore.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For this is the word of Jehovah concerning Shallum,the son of Josiah, king of Judah, the successor of hisfather Josiah, who went forth from this place: "Heshall never come back to it again;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}but in the land ofexile to which they have carried him he shall die, andthis land he shall see no more."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 On Jehoiakim

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Woe to him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And his chambers by injustice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That serveth himself of his neighbour for nothing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And giveth him not his wages\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}That saith, "I will build me a spacious house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And roomy chambers and windows broad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With panels of cedar, and painted vermilion,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Do great cedar palaces make thee a king?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Did not thy father eat and drink,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And enjoy his measure of good things?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet justice and right did he also dispense
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And he cared for the cause of the poor and the needy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is not that true knowledge of Me, saith Jehovah?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But thou hast neither eyes nor heart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For aught save thine own mean profit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The shedding of innocent blood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the practice of wrong and oppression.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This, therefore, is the message of Jehovah to
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Woe unto this man Jehoiakim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No one for him shall lament
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 " O brother of mine," "O sister."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No one for him shall lament
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "An lord!" "Alas for his glory."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But burial like that of an ass shall be his\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Dragged along and flung forth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 On Jehoiachin

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Get thee up tp Lebanon and cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And lift up thy voice in Bashan;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Cry from the hills of Abarim.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For all that thou lovest is shattered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}In the days of good fortune I spoke to thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But thou didst refuse to listen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And such hath thy way been from youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To my voice thou hast never hearkened.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}All thy shepherds like sheep by the wind shall be driven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And those whom thou lovest shall captive depart;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shame and confusion shall then be thy doom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In requital for all thy wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}O thou that inhabitest Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nestled amongst the cedars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How wilt thou groan when thy pangs come upon thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy pain as of woman in travail!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}As truly as I live, saith Jehovah, though Coniah,the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were the signet-ringon thy right hand, yet I would tear him off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Yea, I will deliver thee into the hands of those thatseek thy life, and into the hands of those thou dreadest,into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,and into the hands of the Chaldeans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Yea, thee andthe mother that bore thee I will hurl into another landthan the land thou wast born in, and there thou shaltdie.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Nevermore shall they return to the land to whichthey long to return.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Hath this man Coniah become
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a figure one smasheth in scorn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or a vessel that no man doth care for?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why hath he been cast forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And hurled to a land that was strange to him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}O land, land, land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hear thou the word of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Write this man down as childless;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For none of his seed shall be honoured
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To sit on the throne of David
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or rule any more over Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Unfaithful Rulers to be Succeeded by those that are Faithful

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Woe to the shepherds that ruin and scatter
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The flock that was theirs to pasture.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Concerning the shepherds that tend my people:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ye have scattered My flock and driven them away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And ye have not visited them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I therefore will visit you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the wickedness of your doings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I will gather My flock that is left
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the countries to which I have driven them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will bring them back to their homesteads,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall be fruitful and multiply.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I will raise up shepherds to tend to them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No fear or dismay or terror
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall they know any more, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise of the Ideal King, or Messiah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Behold, saith Jehovah, in the days that are coming
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will raise up to David a righteous shoot,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who shall reign as King, and behave with wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And execute justice and right in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In his days shall Judah be crowned with salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Israel in safety shall dwell;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And this is the name men shall call him\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Our Champion is Jehovah."
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore, behold, saith Jehovah, days are comingwhen men shall no more say, "As surely as Jehovahliveth who brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt,"{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}but "As surely as Jehovah liveth who brought the raceof the household of Israel from the north country andfrom all the countries to which He had driven them";and they shall dwell in their own land.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Judgment on the Prophets

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Character and Fate of the False Prophets
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Concerning the prophets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My heart within me is broken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My bones are all grown soft;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like a drunken man am I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a man overcome of wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 By reason of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And of His glorious majesty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the land is full of adulterers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who run an evil course,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And whose might is not of right.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For prophet and priest are profane:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their wickedness I have witnessed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In Mine own very house, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The way they must tread shall be therefore
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As slippery ground in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whereon they are thrust till they fall:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I will bring evil upon them\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The year of their visitation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In Samaria\uc1\u8217*s prophets I witnessed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Behaviour that was revolting;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They prophesied by the Baal
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And seduced My people Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But a horrible thing have I seen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the prophets of Jerusalem\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Adultery, walking in falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And strengthening the hands of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That no man doth turn from his wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They are all of them grown like Sodom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And her citizens like Gomorrah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Thus therefore concerning the prophets
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Declareth Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Behold! I will feed them with wormwood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And gall will I give them to drink;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For from Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s prophets there spreadeth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Impiety over the land.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Promises are False, because the Prophets are not Divinely Inspired

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hearken not to the words of the prophets;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They fill you with hopes that are vain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Tis their own heart\uc1\u8217*s vision they utter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And not what Jehovah hath spoken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They assure those who mock at the word of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That all with them shall be well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They assure those who follow their own stubborn hearts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That no evil shall come upon them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But which of them ever hath stood and looked on
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the council of Jehovah?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Or which of them ever hath listened
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And heard any word of His?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I sent not the prophets, and yet they ran;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Notwithstanding I spoke not to them, yet they prophesied.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But if ever they truly had stood in My council
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And heard any word that was Mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My people they would have turned
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From their evil ways and behaviour.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Inescapable Doom of the False Prophets

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Am I, saith Jehovah, a God that is nigh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And not a God afar?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Can any man hide, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In secret, where I cannot see him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do not I fill heaven and earth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I have heard what the prophets say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That prophesy lies in My name;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "I have dreamed, I have dreamed, I have dreamed."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Will the heart of the prophets not turn
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That prophesy lies, and that prophesy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nought but their own heart\uc1\u8217*s delusions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And think to drive My name
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Clean out of the minds of My people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By the dreams that they tell one another,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As erst by the Baal My name
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Was driven from the mind of their fathers?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The prophet that hath a dream\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let him declare his dream:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And he that hath My word\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let him faithfully utter My word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What hath straw, saith Jehovah, to do with the wheat?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Is not My word like a fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a hammer that shatters the rocks?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Mark this, therefore, saith Jehovah, I am againstthe prophets that steal My words from one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}I am against the prophets who take their tonguesand immediately reel off an oracle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}I am against theprophets that prophesy living dreams, seducing Mypeople by their lies and their windy boasts. They havenot been sent by Me, nor have they any commissionfrom Me, and to this people they bring no sort of gainwhatever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The "Burden" of the Lord No More

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}When a layman or a prophet or a priest asketh theewhat is the burden of Jehovah, tell them, "You"saith Jehovah, "are the burden, and I will cast you off.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}As for the prophet, the priest, or the layman, whospeaks any more of Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s \uc1\u8217*burden,\uc1\u8217*, that man andhis household I will visit with judgment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}You mustsay to one another, \uc1\u8217*What is Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s answer?\uc1\u8217* or\uc1\u8217*What is Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s message?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But you are not tomake mention to the burden of Jehovah any more.Every man\uc1\u8217*s own (uninspired) word shall be hisburden; for you have perverted the words of theliving God, Jehovah of Hosts, our God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}If, however,you persist in speaking of \uc1\u8217*the burden of Jehovah,\uc1\u8217*Jehovah pronounces this word of doom: Because youpersist in using this expression \uc1\u8217*burden of Jehovah,\uc1\u8217*despite My explicit command to you not to use it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}I will lift you up and cast you out of My sight \uc1\u8211* youand the city I gave to you and your fathers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and Iwill lay upon you everlasting reproach and unendingdisgrace which shall never be forgotten."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Baskets of Figs and their Meaning

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}After Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah,with the princes, the craftsmen and the smiths, had beencarried from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, king ofBabylon, into exile in Babylon, Jehovah in a visionshowed me two baskets of figs set down in front ofJehovah\uc1\u8217*s Temple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}One basket contained excellentfigs, like the figs that are first ripe: the figs in the otherwere very bad, so bad that they could not be eaten."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Jehovah said to me, "What seest thou, Jeremiah?"And I answered, "Figs \uc1\u8211* the good figs verygood, and the bad very bad, so bad that they cannot beeaten."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Thereupon this message came to me from Jehovah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}"Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: As with thesegood figs, so will I regard with favour the exiles ofJudah, whom I have sent out of this place into the landof the Chaldeans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will set Mine eyes upon them forgood, and bring them back to this land. I will not pullthem down, but I will build them; I will not pluck themup, but I will plant them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and I will give them a heartto understand me, that I am Jehovah. They shall beMy people and I will be their God, if they turn to Mewith all their heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}As for the figs that were too bad to eat, Thus saithJehovah: They are symbolic of the fate of Zedekiah,king of Judah, and his princes, and the survivors ofJerusalem that are left in this land, and those whosehome is in the land of Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For I will make theman object of consternation among every kingdom inthe world, a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and acurse, in every place to which I shall drive them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and I will send among them sword, famine and pestilence,till they perish from the land that I gave to themand their forefathers.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Divine Judgment to be Executed by the Babylonians
upon Judah, upon the Neighbouring Nations, and upon the World at Large
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Prophetic Warning Disregarded by the People

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}The message which came to Jeremiah concerning allthe people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim,the son of Josiah, king of Judah, which was the firstyear of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the messagehe delivered to all the people of Judah and allthe citizens of Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For twenty-three years \uc1\u8211* from the thirteenth yearof Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, up to thisday \uc1\u8211* the message of Jehovah has been coming to me,and I have declared it to you early and late, but you{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}have not listened. And early and late Jehovah hasbeen sending to you all His servants the prophets,through you have not listened nor inclined an attentiveear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My message was this: "If you abandon, everyman of you, your wicked ways and your evil behaviour,then you shall dwell for ever in the land which Jehovah,gave in the ancient time to you and your forefathers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But do not indulge in the worship or service of othergods, and do not provoke Jehovah with the fabricationsof your own hands: this can only injure yourselves."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But you have not listened to me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Judgment upon Judah and Her Neighbours

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts: Becauseye have not listened to My words,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will send andfetch a clan from the north, and I will bring themagainst this land and its inhabitants and against thesurrounding nation. I will devote them to destructionso appalling that men shall hiss and revile themfor ever;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and I will banish from them the voice of mirthand gladness, the voice of bridegroom and bride, thesound of the millstones and the light of the lamp.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This whole land shall be a waste and a horror, andthese nations shall serve the king of Babylon for seventyyears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When, however, seventy years are completed, I will punishthe king of Babylon, and that nation, saith Jehovah, for theirguilt, and also the land of the Chaldeans, which I will makedesolate for ever;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and I will bring upon that land all the wordsI have pronounced against it \uc1\u8211* everything prophesied byJeremiah against all the nations, that is recorded in this Book.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They, yes they, shall be reduced to slavery at the hands ofmany nations and of great kings, and I will give them the rewardthat their acts and deeds deserve.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Cup of Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s Fury to be Drunk by all Nations

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For thus said Jehovah, the God of Israel, to me,"Take from My hand this wine-cup of wrath, and giveit to all the nations to whom I send thee to drink from;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and let them drink and reel in madness because of thesword that I will send among them."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So I took thecup from the hand of Jehovah, and I gave it to all thenations to whom Jehovah had sent me, to drink from\uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with her kings andprinces, to be made a desolation, a horror, a scorn,and a curse;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Pharaoh, king of Egypt, with hisministers, his princes, and all his people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and allthe foreign folk; all the kings of the land of Uz, andall the kings of the land of the Philistines \uc1\u8211* Ashkelon,Gaza, Ekron, and the survivors of Ashdod;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Edom,Moab, and Ammon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}all the kings of Tyre and Sidon;and the kings of the coast-land across the sea;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Dedan and Tema and Buz, and all those that have thecorners of their hair clipped;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}all the kings of NorthernArabia, and all the kings of the north, far and near,one with another, and all the kingdoms on the face ofthe earth; and after them shall the king of Sheshachdrink.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Thou shalt say to them, Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,the God of Israel: Drink yourselves drunk till ye fall inyour vomit, to rise no more, because of the sword that Ishall send among you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}If they refuse to take the cup fromthy hand to drink, then thou shalt say to them, Thus saithJehovah of Hosts: Drink it you shall;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}for, if the citywhich is called by Mine own name is the first to feel theweight of My displeasure, how can you expect to goutterly unpunished? Nay, verily, ye shall not escape;for I am summoning the sword upon all the inhabitantsof the earth, saith Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}As for thee, let thy prophetic message to them bethis:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Jehovah will roar from on high,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He will utter His voice from His holy abode;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Against His own fold He will mightily roar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He will lift a "hurrah" like the men at the vintage
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Against those that dwell on the earth, every one.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then din shall reach to the end of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Jehovah doth hold a dispute with the nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, He with all flesh will contend in judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And those that are base He will give to the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 See! misery spreadeth from nation to nation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the uttermost corners of earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 There stirreth a mighty tempest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}That day the slain of Jehovah shall lie
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From one end of the earth to the other,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Unmourned, ungathered, unburied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As dung on the face of the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Howl, ye shepherds, and cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And roll you in ashes, ye lords of the flock;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the days are ripe for your slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like lambs that are doomed shall ye fall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}No escape shall be left for the shepherds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No flight for the lords of the flock;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}O hark to the cry of the shepherds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The howl of the lords of the flock;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Jehovah destroyeth their pasture.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The meadows, so peaceful, are hushed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At the fierce hot wrath of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The lions have left their covert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the land is become a desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because of the cruel sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And because of His fierce hot anger.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah on Trial for his life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim, the son ofJosiah, king of Judah, the message which follows came(to Jeremiah) from Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saith Jehovah,Take thy stand in the Temple court, and declare withoutreservation to all the people of Judah who are cometo worship in the Temple, the whole message that Ihave commissioned thee to declare.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}It may be thatthey will listen and severally abandon their wickedways: if they do, I will relent and not bring upon themthe calamity I am planning as penalty for their evilbehaviour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}This, then, is what thou art to say tothem, Thus saith Jehovah: If ye refuse to obey Me\uc1\u8211*to live in accordance with the law that I have set beforeyou,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and to listen, as ye have never yet listened, to thewords of My servants the prophets, whom early andlate I have been sending to you \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}then I will make thisTemple like Shiloh, and as for this city, I will turn itinto an object of execration to every nation in the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now the audience that listened to this message ofJeremiah\uc1\u8217*s in the Temple included not only the wholebody of the people, but the priests and the prophetsas well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So when he had concluded the message whichJehovah had commissioned him to declare to the wholepeople, the priests and the prophets seized him. "Youmust die," they exclaimed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}"for how dare youdeliver in the name of Jehovah such a message as this,that this Temple will meet the fate of Shiloh, and thatthis city shall become an inhabited desolation?"At this juncture all the people began to crowd roundJeremiah in the Temple.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now echoes of this tumult having reached the earsof the countries of Judah, they proceeded from thepalace up to the Temple; and after they had takentheir seats at the entrance to the new gate of the Temple,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}the priests and the prophets addressed themselves tothe countries and the whole body of the people. "Thisman." they said, "is guilty of a capital offence; forhe has solemnly declared that this city is doomed\uc1\u8211*you have heard him with your own ears.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}ThenJeremiah in his turn addressed himself to the courtiersand to the whole body of the people. "It is JehovahHimself," he said, "that has sent me to proclaim uponthis Temple and city the doom which you have justheard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If, however, you amend your life and conduct,and listen to the voice of Jehovah your God, thenHe will relent and cancel His threat of catastrophe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As for myself, I am in your hands: deal with me asyou think right and proper.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But be very sure of this,that, if you put me to death, you will only be bringinginnocent blood upon yourselves, upon this city, andupon her people; for it is the simple truth that Jehovahhas sent me to deliver this message in your hearing."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Thereupon, the courtiers and all the people said to thepriests and the prophets, "This man is not guilty ofany capital offence; for his message to us has behindit the authority of Jehovah our God."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Them some of the elders, rising to their feet, thusaddressed the people assembled:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}"In the days of Hezekiah,king of Judah," they said, "Micah of Moresheth wasprophesying; and this is what he said to all the peopleof Judah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like a field shall Zion be ploughed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Jerusalem levelled to ruins;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the Temple Mount shall become
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a thickly wooded height.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Did Hezekiah the king or the people of Judah dreamof putting him to death? Rather were they not so overcomeby godly fear that they sued for the favour ofJehovah, with the result that He relented and cancelledHis threat of catastrophe? But look at us! Why, we areon the verge of involving ourselves in a great calamity."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Fate of Urijah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}There was another case of a man who deliveredprophetic messages in the name of Jehovah \uc1\u8211* Uriah,the son of Shemaiah, who belonged to Kiriath-jearim.Quite in the manner of Jeremiah, he too had pronouncedthe doom of this city and land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}His message havingreached the ears of King Jehoiakim, with all the courtand the military officials, the king took steps to havehim put to death. Urijah, however, got wind of hispurpose, and in terror he took to flight, finally reachingEgypt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}but King Jehoiakim despatched commissionersto Egypt \uc1\u8211* Elnathan the son of Achbor, and a fewothers \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}who removed him from Egypt and broughthim back to the presence of King Jehoiakim, whohad him slain with the sword, and his dead body flunginto the public burying-ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Jeremiah, however, had (also) the support of Ahikam,the son of Shaphan, who saved him from being deliveredto the people for execution.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 No Hope of Speedy Release from Babylon

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Babylonian Yoke will not be soon or easily Broken

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 27}In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, the sonof Josiah, king of Judah, Jeremiah received fromJehovah the message which follows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus spokeJehovah: Make thongs and bars and put them onthy neck,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and send a message to the kings of Edom,Moab, Ammon, Tyre, and Sidon, through their ambassadorswho have come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah,king of Judah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and bid them say to their masters,"Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel:Convey this message to your masters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I have madethe earth, with man and beast on the face of it,by My great power and outstretched arm, and I give itto whomsoever I please.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}At the moment I have givenall these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, kingof Babylon, My servant; the beasts of the field alsohave I given him to serve him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All the nations shall serve him and his son and his grandson,till the time of his own land shall come \uc1\u8211* then many nationsand great kings shall make him serve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The nation and the kingdom which refuses to serveNebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and to put theirnecks to the yoke of the king of Babylon \uc1\u8211* that nation,saith Jehovah, I will punish with sword, famine andpestilence, till I have delivered them into his hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As for yourselves, do not listen to your prophets,diviners, dreamers, soothsayers, or sorcerers, whoassure you that you will not be subject to the king ofBabylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It is a lie that they preach to you, and itwill end in your removal from your own land; for Iwill indeed drive you away and ye shall perish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Butthe nation that brings its neck to the yoke of the king ofBabylon and serves him, I will leave on their own soil,which they shall continue to till and occupy."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}A similar message I gave to Zedekiah, king of Judah,"If," said I, "you bring your neck to the yoke of theking of Babylon, and serve him and his people, you willbe spared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Why should you and your people die by thesword, famine and pestilence, with which Jehovah hasthreatened the nation that refuses to serve the king ofBabylon?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Do not listen to the prophets when they tellyou that you will not be subject to the king of Babylon:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}they are preaching to you a lie. I have not sent them,saith Jehovah: it is a lie that they are preaching to youin My name, and it can only end in your being drivenout and perishing \uc1\u8211* you and the prophets that preachto you."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the message that I gave to the priests and to allthis people was this: "Thus saith Jehovah: Do notlisten to the prophets when they tell you that the vesselsof the Temple will soon be brought back from Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They are preaching to you a lie: do not listen to them.Serve the king of Babylon and you will be spared:why should this city become a ruin?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But if they arereal prophets with a real message from Jehovah, letthem entreat Jehovah of Hosts not to allow the vesselsthat are left in the Temple and in the royal palace atJerusalem, to be taken to Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For thus saithJehovah of Hosts concerning the pillars and the seaand the stands and the rest of the vessels that are leftin this city,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}which were not taken by Nebuchadnezzar,king of Babylon, when he carried Jeconiah, the son ofJehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the nobles of Judahand Jerusalem, from Jerusalem to Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yes,thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, concerningthe vessels that are left in the Temple and inthe royal palace and at Jerusalem;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}To Babylonthey shall be brought, and there they shall remain tillthe day that I visit them, saith Jehovah; then I willbring them up and restore them to this place."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Clash between the False Prophet and the True

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 28}The same year, at the beginning of the reign ofZedekiah, king of Judah, in the fifth month of the fourthyear, Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, whobelonged to Gibeon, addressed me as follows in theTemple in the presence of the priests and of all thepeople.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God ofIsrael: \uc1\u8217*I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Within two years\uc1\u8217* time I will bring back to this place allthe Temple vessels that Nebuchadnezzar, king ofBabylon took from this place and carried to Babylon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, andall the exiles of Judah that have gone to Babylon, Iwill bring back to this place, saith Jehovah; for I willbreak the yoke of the king of Babylon.\uc1\u8217*"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jeremiah the prophet replied to Hananiah theprophet in the presence of the priests and of all thepeople that were standing in the Temple;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and Jeremiahthe prophet said, "Amen! Jehovah do so! MayJohevah fulfil your prophecy and bring back the Templevessels and all the exiles from Babylon to this place!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I ask you, however to listen to this word that I amabout to speak in your hearing and in the hearing of allthe people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}From the beginning the prophets whopreceded you and me in their messages concerning manylands and mighty kingdoms, prophesied war.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If aprophet prophesies peace, it is only when his word hasbeen fulfilled that you can be sure that he has had a realcommission from Jehovah."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Hananiah took thebar off Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s neck, broke it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and declared in thepresence of all the people, "Thus saith Jehovah:\uc1\u8217*Within two years\uc1\u8217* time, I will similarly break theyoke of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, off thenecks of all the nations.\uc1\u8217*" Then Jeremiah the prophetwent away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But after Hananiah had broken the bar off Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*sneck, there came to Jeremiah this message fromJehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}"Go and say to Hananiah, Thus saithJehovah, The wooden bar you have indeed broken,butI will replace it with a bar of iron.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For thus saithJehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel: The yoke that Iwill put on the necks of all these nations will be madeof iron \uc1\u8211* a yoke of service to Nebuchadnezzar, king ofBabylon: for serve him they shall. I have also givenhim the beasts of the field."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Jeremiah said toHananiah, "Listen, Hananiah. You have no commissionfrom Jehovah: you are making this peopletrust a lie.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore thus saith Jehovah: \uc1\u8217*Mark thiswell: I will dismiss thee from the face of the earth.This very year thou shalt die; for thy words are adisloyalty to Jehovah.\uc1\u8217*"{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And that very year, in theseventh month, the prophet Hananiah died.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Exhorts the Exiles to settle down in Babylon

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 29}The following is a copy of the letter sent fromJerusalem by Jeremiah the prophet to the elders, thepriests, the prophets, and all the people, who had beencarried from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar to exile inBabylon \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}after the surrender of Jeconiah the king,and the queen-mother, and the eunuchs, and the princesof Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen and smiths\uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}the letter being sent by the hands of Eleasah the son ofShaphan and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, who hadbeen despatched to Babylon to Nebuchanezzar, king ofBabylon, by Zedekiah, king of Judah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}"Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, toall the exiles whom I have carried from Jerusalem toBabylon:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Build houses and settle; plant gardensand eat the fruit of them; take wives and rear families;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}take wives also for your sons and give your daughtersto husbands, that they may have sons and daughters;increase your numbers and do not let them diminish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And strive for the welfare of the country to which Ihave brought you as exiles. Pray for it to Jehovah;for your own welfare and hers are bound up together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel:Do not let yourselves be beguiled by the prophets anddiviners in your midst, and do not listen to the dreams{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}they dream; for it is a lie that they preach to you inMy name \uc1\u8211* they have no commission from Me, saithJehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For thus saith Jehovah: As soon as Babylon\uc1\u8217*sseventy years are accomplished, I will visit you andbring you back to this place, in fulfilment of the graciouspromise I made you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For I know the thoughts I cherishtowards you \uc1\u8211* thoughts of weal and not of woe \uc1\u8211* tobestow upon you a future and a hope.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When youcall, I will answer you, and I will listen to yourprayer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If ye seek Me ye shall find Me. If ye seekMe with all your heart,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will reveal Myself to you,saith Jehovah; and I will restore your fortunes and gather youfrom all the nations and places to which I have driven you,saith Jehovah, and I will bring you back to the place fromwhich I carried you into exile.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But Jehovah, you say, has raised up for you prophetsin Babylon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For thus saith Jehovah concerning the king who sits onthe throne of David, and concerning all the people whose homeis in this city \uc1\u8211* those brethren of yours who have not had toaccompany you into exile.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts: See! Iwill send the sword, the famine and the pestilence among them,and I will make them like figs that are too horribly bad to eat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will hunt them with sword, famine, and pestilence and I willmake them an object of consternation to every kingdom in theworld, and object of execration and horror, of scorn and insultamong all the nations to which I have driven them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}because,saith Jehovah, they refused to listen to the messages I sent themearly and late through My servants the prophets \uc1\u8211* yes, theyrefused to listen, saith Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}See, then, that ye listen toJehovah\uc1\u8217*s message, all of you exiles whom I have sent fromJerusalem to Babylon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Well, thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, theGod of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah andZedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who preach to you a liein My name. Mark this: I will deliver them into thehands of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and hewill slay them before your eyes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and their fate shall beadopted by all the exiles of Judah in Babylon as amodel for imprecation. "Jehovah make thee," theywill say, "like Zedekiah and Ahab, whom the king ofBabylon roasted in the fire,"{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}because they wroughtimpious folly in Israel, in committing adultery withtheir neighbours\uc1\u8217* wives and delivering in My namelying messages which I never gave them. Well Iknow it, saith Jehovah, and I am witness."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Touching the message of Jehovah of Hosts, theGod of Israel, to be delivered by Jeremiah concerningShemaiah of Nehelam.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}This is the man who sent aletter in his own name to Zephaniah, the son ofMaaseiah the priest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}"Jehovah," he wrote, "hasmade you priest in the place of Jehoiada the priest,to exercise an oversight in the Temple over all that playthe mad prophet and the ecstatic, and to put all suchin the stocks and in the iron collar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Why then did younot rebuke Jeremiah of Anathoth, who has been playingthe mad prophet among you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For he has sent amessage to us in Babylon, maintaining that the exilewould be long, and urging us to build houses and settle,and to plant gardens and eat the fruit of them."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Now Zephaniah the priest read the letter in the hearingof Jeremiah the prophet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then there came to Jeremiah this message fromJehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Send to all the exiles and say, Thus saithJehovah concerning Shemaiah of Nehelam: Shemaiahhas been prophesying to you without any commissionfrom Me and has made you trust in a lie.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For thisreason, therefore\uc1\u8211* thus saith Jehovah \uc1\u8211* I will punishShemaiah of Nehelam and his descendants: not aman shall he have among you who will ever see the goodfortune I will bring you, saith Jehovah: for his wordsare a disloyalty to Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Glorious Future

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Restoration of Israel and Judah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise of Deliverance in the Day of Distress

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 30}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Write all the{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}words I have spoken to thee in a book. For mark!the days are coming, saith Jehovah, when I will restorethe fortunes of My people Israel and Judah, andre-establish them in possession of the land I gave theirforefathers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now these are the words Jehovah hath spokenconcerning Israel and Judah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yea, thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 We have heard a cry of terror,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of horror and dispeace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Ask ye now and see
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 If a man doth travail with child.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What meaneth them this sight\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Every man with his hands on his loins?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And what mean all these faces
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Turned to a deathly pallor?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Alas! for great is this day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No day is like unto it;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A time of distress for Jacob\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yet out of it he shall be saved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will break the yoke from their necks;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will snap their bonds asunder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And strangers no more shall they serve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But Jehovah their God they shall serve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And David also, their king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whom I will raise up unto them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So fear thou not, O Jacob My servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O Israel, be not dismayed, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For see! I will save both thee and thine offspring
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the far distant land where captive ye lie.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And Jacob once more shall have quiet and ease
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In his own land, with no one make him afraid;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For I, saith Jehovah, am with thee to save thee.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 An end I will make of the nations\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of each, among whom I have scattered thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But of thee I will not make an end.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will not leave thee wholly unpunished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But in measure I will chastise thee.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise of Healing

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou art wounded past all healing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And smitten very sore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There is no one to plead thy cause;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No healing for thy wound,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy scars remain unclosed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Thy lovers have all forgotten thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They care for thee no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have struck thee as foemen strike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With chastisement unpitying,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because of thy manifold guilt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thy sins that are grown so mighty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Why criest thou over thy wound,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That thy pain is past all healing?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Tis because of thy manifold guilt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thy sins that are grown so mighty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have done these things unto thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Devoured shall be therefore all those that devour thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thine enemies all shall go into captivity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Those that despoil thee themselves shall be spoiled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thy plunders I will consign to be plundered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will cause new flesh to grow over thy wound,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will heal thy scars, saith Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For men have called thee an outcast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Our quarry" \uc1\u8211* for whom none careth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Happy City, with her Native Prince

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The tents that were Jacob\uc1\u8217*s I yet will restore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On the sites that were his I will show My compassion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On her own proper mound shall the city be built,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the place shall stand on its rightful site.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And out of them songs of praise shall float,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the voices of them that make merry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will add to their numbers till many they be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will crown them with glory, and they shall be honoured.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Their children shall be as in days of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their sacred assembly safe under My care;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will punish all those that oppress them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Their prince shall be one of themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their ruler shall come from among them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will let him draw nigh and approach Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For where is the man, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That else had the courage to face Me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And ye shall be My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And I will be your God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Judgment shall Break upon the Wicked

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Hark! \uc1\u8217*tis Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s tempest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It goeth forth with fury\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A whirling tempest that whirleth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Full straight for the heads of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The glowing wrath of Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall not be backward turned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Until He have fully accomplished
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The purpose of His heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At the end of the days ye shall know what this meaneth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Happy Return from Exile

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 31}At that time, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will be God indeed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Unto all the families of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall be My people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The people escaped from the sword
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shall most surely find grace in the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When Israel seeketh for rest,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}From afar will Jehovah appear to him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have loved thee with love everlasting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And so I with kindness have drawn thee.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Once more, O virgin of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will build thee up securely:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Once more shalt thou deck thee with timbrels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And step in the merry dance;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Once more on the hills of Samaria
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall vineyards be planted by thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the planters shall eat what they planted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For a day shall come when the watchers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On Ephraim\uc1\u8217*s highlands shall cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Arise, let us pilgrim to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Where dwelleth Jehovah our God."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For thus saith Jehovah to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ring out a cry of joy;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shout on the top of the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Publish, and praise, and say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Jehovah hath saved His people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The remnant of Israel."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Behold, from the north land I bring them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And out of earth\uc1\u8217*s uttermost parts I will gather them\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Among them the blind and the lame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the women with child, with those soon to be mothers;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hither again they shall come \uc1\u8211* a great company.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Forth they went with tears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But their homeward way I will comfort;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will lead them to streams of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On a level way without stumbling;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I am a Father to Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Ephraim is My firstborn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Hear, O ye nations, the word of Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Declare it to far distant islands and say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "He that scattered Israel shall gather him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And keep him as shepherd his flock."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For Jehovah hath ransomed Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And redeemed him from hands that were stronger than his.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They shall come, they shall sing on the heights of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All radiant with joy at the gifts of Jehovah\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The corn and the wine and the oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the young of the flock and the herd;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their soul like a well-watered garden shall be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall pine no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then the maids shall rejoice in the dance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the young and the old shall be merry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will turn their mourning to joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will comfort and gladden them after their sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The priests I will satisfy richly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My folk shall be filled with My bounty.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Mother Rachel\uc1\u8217*s Sorrow for her Exiled Children

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Hark! there echoes through Ramah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lament and bitter weeping:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Tis Rachel bewailing her children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And refusing to be comforted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because they are no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Restrain thy voice from weeping,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And keep thine eyes from tears;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For thy work shall have its reward,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the land of the foe shall thy children return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}There is hope for thy coming days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy children shall return.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s Penitence, Return and Welcome Home

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Truly I heard the voice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of Ephraim thus lamenting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Thou hast chastened me, and I was chastened;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like a calf unbroken was I.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Bring me back, and let me return,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Thou art Jehovah my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Mine exile hath led me to penitence;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Chastened, I smote on my beasts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Put to shame and confusion am I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For I bear the reproach of my youth."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Is not Ephraim my dear, dear son?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is he not a darling child?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For let Me but utter his name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And My mind keeps resting upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So My heart for him doth yearn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And pity him I must.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Set way-marks, and make thee guide-posts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Bethink thee of the highway,;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The road by which thou didst travel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Return, O virgin of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Return to these thy cities.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}How long, O backsliding daughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Wilt thou remain irresolute?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For on earth hath Jehovah created a new thing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A woman shall into a man be transformed.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Restoration of Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Once more shall this speech be used
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the land and the cities of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When I have restored their fortunes:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Jehovah grant thee His blessing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou sacred Mountain, where righteousness dwelleth."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yea, Judah shall dwell therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all her cities together\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The men that plough the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the shepherds that wander with flocks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For the weary soul I refresh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And each soul that doth pine I replenish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Thereupon I awoke and gazed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For my sleep had been sweet unto me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Behold, saith Jehovah, the days are coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When I will sow the households of Israel and Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With the seed of men and the seed of cattle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And as once I was awakeful to pluck them up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To break down, to afflict, overthrow and destroy them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So now I will watch over them (once more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But this time) to build up and to plant, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}In those days men shall say no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "The fathers have eaten sour grapes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the children\uc1\u8217*s teeth are on edge;"
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But each for his own sin shall die.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the man that hath eaten sour grapes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall find his own teeth set on edge.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The New Covenant

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Behold the days are coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When I, saith Jehovah, will make a new covenant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With the households of Israel and Judah\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But unlike the covenant I made with their fathers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The day, when I took their hand in Mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To bring them out of the land of Egypt\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The covenant they themselves did break,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So that I, on My part, was constrained to abhor them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But this, saith Jehovah, is the covenant I will make
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With the household of Israel after those days:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will set My law in their bosom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And write it upon their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And I will be their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall be My people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}No more need any teach
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His fellow to know Jehovah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For one and all shall know Me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The small and the great alike;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I will pardon their guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their sin will remember no more.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Perpetuity of Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Thus declareth Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who giveth the sun for a light by day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The moon and the stars for a light by night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who stirreth the sea that the waves thereof roar\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah of Hosts is His name:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Not until those fixed orbs shall vanish
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Clean out of My sight, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall Israel\uc1\u8217*s race cease to be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A nation before Me for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Not till the heavens above can be measured,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And earth\uc1\u8217*s foundations be searched out beneath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall I ever cast off the race of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For all they have done, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Expansion of Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s Ancient Boundary

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Be assured, saith Jehovah, the days are coming, whenthe city shall again be built up for Jehovah from thetower of Hananel to the gate at the corner,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and theline of the wall shall pass straight on to the hill Gareb,where it will turn round to Goah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Further, the entirevalley (of Hinnom) with its corpses and ashes andthe whole locality as far as the valley of Kidron upto the corner of the horse-gate on the east, shall beconsecrated to Jehovah; it shall not be plucked up orthrown down again for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 During the Siege Jeremiah Displays his Confidence in the Ultimate
Restoration of his People by Redeeming a Piece of Land Belonging to hisFamily at Anathoth
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Purchase

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 32}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovahin the tenth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah, whichwas in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}At thattime the forces of the king of Babylon were investingJerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was confined tothe guard-house of the royal palace,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}where Zedekiah theking had shut him up on account of his propheticpreaching. "What do you mean," he had demanded,"by an announcement of this kind: \uc1\u8217*Thus saithJehovah, Depend upon it, I will give this city into thehands of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Nor shall Zedekiah, king of Judah, escape the hands ofthe Chaldeans; he will assuredly be delivered into thehands of the king of Babylon. He shall speak to himface to face, and see him eye to eye;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and he shall bringZedekiah to Babylon, where he will remain till I visithim. Though you fight with the Chaldeans you shallhave no success.\uc1\u8217*"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now there came to Jeremiah the following messagefrom Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}"Hanamel, the son of thine uncleShallum, is about to pay thee a visit, to request thee tobuy the land he holds at Anathoth; and he will urgethat, as thou art the next of kin, it is thy privilege andduty to receive it."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And so it happened: my cousinHanamel paid me in the guard-house the visit Jehovahhad intimated, and said: "I want you to buy the landI possess at Anathoth; for you are the legal heir, andit is your duty to secure it \uc1\u8211* so buy it for yourself."Then I recognised that the message I had received wasreally from Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So I bought the land at Anathothfrom my cousin Hanamel, and I weighed out the moneyto him \uc1\u8211* seventeen silver shekels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then I signed thedeed and sealed it, took witnesses, and paid him themoney in full.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I then took the purchase-deed\uc1\u8211*the one which was sealed and the one which was open\uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and gave it to Baruch, the son of Neriah, the son ofMachesiah, in the presence of my cousin Hanamel, andof the witnesses who had signed the purchase-deedand of all the Jews in the guard-house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In theirpresence I then gave these instructions to Baruch:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}"Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel:Take these deeds \uc1\u8211* this purchase deed which is sealedand this deed which is open \uc1\u8211* and put them in anearthenware jar, so that they may be preserved for along time to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,the God of Israel: A time is coming when houses andfields and vineyards shall again be bought in this land."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prophet\uc1\u8217*s Prayer

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now, after I had given the purchase-deed to Baruch,the son of Neriah, I prayed in these words to Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}"Ah, Lord Jehovah! Thou, by Thy mighty power andoutstretched arm, hast made the heavens and the earth,and nothing is too hard for Thee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Kindness Thoushowest to thousands, and retribution for the guilt ofthe fathers thou bringest home to their children afterthem, Thou great and mighty God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}great in purpose andmighty in action, whose eyes are open to all the ways ofmen, giving to each his deserts and the fruit of his deeds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In the land of Egypt Thou didst set in Israel andamong (other) men signs and wonders (which arecommemorated) unto this day, and so didst win forThyself the renown that is Thine to-day;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and Thoudidst bring Thy people Israel out of the land of Egyptby signs and wonders, with mighty hand and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}outstretched arm and terrors great; and Thou gavest themthis land which Thou didst swear to their fathers togive them \uc1\u8211* a land flowing with milk and honey \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}andthey came in and took possession of it. But they wouldnot listen to Thy voice, nor live in accordance with Thylaw; they have left undone all that Thou didst commandthem to do; and so Thou hast brought all thismisery upon them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Behold how the siege-mounds for storming the cityare already close upon it, and under the stress ofsword, famine and pestilence, the city is already as goodas given into the hands of the Chaldeans that are assailingit. What Thou hast threatened has come, asThou Thyself seest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And it was Thou Thyself, OLord Jehovah, who didst command me to buy the land;(and this I have done), writing and sealing the deedand calling witnesses, though all the while the city isalready as good as delivered into the hands of theChaldeans."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Divine Answer: First, Judgment for Sin

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then there came to Jeremiah the following messagefrom Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}I am Jehovah, the God of all flesh: isthere anything too hard for Me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Therefore thus saithJehovah: Behold! I am about to deliver this city intothe hands of the Chaldeans and of Nebuchadnezzar,king of Babylon, and he shall take it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Yes, theChaldeans that are assailing this city shall come and setthis city on fire and burn it, with the houses on whoseroofs they have provoked Me by burning sacrifice tothe Baal and by offering drink-offerings to othergods;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}for, ever since their youth the people of Israeland Judah have done nothing but evil in My sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}From the day it was built up to this day, this city hasprovoked Me to remove it, in wrath and fury, out ofMy sight,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}for all the evil that the people of Israel andJudah have wrought to vex Me \uc1\u8211* themselves, with theirkings, princes, priests and prophets, with the men ofJudah and the citizens of Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They haveturned their backs to Me instead of their faces; andthough I taught them early and late, they would neverlisten or accept correction.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}The very House thatbears My name they have defiled by introducinginto it their abominable worship.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}They have builtBaal sanctuaries in the Valley of the son of Hinnomfor the (fiery) consecration of their sons and daughtersto Molech, though this was no commandment ofMine \uc1\u8211* it never entered into My mind that they shoulddo this abomination, and thus involve Judah in sin.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Thereafter, Promise of Restoration

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Now, therefore, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,concerning the city of which ye say that hunger,famine and pestilence have already as good as deliveredit into the hands of the king of Babylon:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}See! I willgather them out of all the lands to which, in My greatwrath, anger, and fury, I have driven them, for I willbring them back to this place and settle them heresecurely;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}and they shall be My people, and I will betheir God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}A single heart I will give them, and a singleway (will I set before them), that they may hold Mein reverence for ever, and that they and their childrenafter them may prosper;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and I will make with theman everlasting covenant to follow them ceaselesslywith My blessing, and I will put the fear of Me in theirhearts, that they may follow Me without swerving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}It will also be a joy to Me to do them good; andfaithfully, with all My heart and soul, I will plant them inthis land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}For thus saith Jehovah, As surely as I have broughtupon this people all this mass of misery, so surely will Ibring upon them all the blessings I promise them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}In this land that ye call a desolation, forsaken of manand beast and delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans,fields shall be bought once more.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Yes, menshall buy fields for money, subscribing and sealing thedeeds, and taking witnesses, in the district of Benjaminand the neighbourhood of Jerusalem and the cities ofJudah, in the cities of the hill country, the lowland,and the south. For I will restore their fortunes, saithJehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Renewed Promises of Restoration

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jerusalem and Judah will be Pardoned, Restored, Made Glad and Renowned

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 33}A second message from Jehovah came to Jeremiahwhile he was still confined in the guard-house. Itwas this:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saith Jehovah, who created the earthand formed it to stand fast \uc1\u8211* Jehovah is His name:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}"Call to Me, and in answer I will tell thee great andhidden things, of which thou art unaware."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, concerningthe houses of this city and the royal palaces of Judahwhich have been demolished to make a defence againstthe siege-mounds and the sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The Chaldeans arecoming to fight and to fill them with the dead bodiesof the men whom I have slain in Mine anger and fury,and whose manifold wickedness has constrained Meto hide My face from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Nevertheless, I will closeup the city\uc1\u8217*s wounds and heal her completely, and Iwill unveil to them treasures of peace and stability.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The fortunes of Judah and Israel I will restore; and Iwill build them up as of old.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will cleanse them of allthe guilt of their sin against Me, and I will forgive allthe guilt of their sin and rebellion against Me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Andshe shall be to Me a source of delight, of praise, and ofglory among all the nations of the earth, when they hearof all the happiness that I shall achieve for them; andthey shall fear and tremble at all the happiness and allthe prosperity that I shall provide for them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Thus saith Jehovah: In this place that you call adesolation, forsaken of man and beast, in the cities ofJudah and on the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate,forsaken of man and beast,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}there shall once again beheard the voice of mirth and gladness, the voice ofbridegroom and bride, the voice of those that say, as theybring their thank-offerings into the House of Jehovah, Give thanks to Jehovah of Hosts, For Jehovah is gracious, His kindness endureth for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
For I will restore the fortunes of the land, saithJehovah, as in the olden time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Thus saith Jehovah ofHosts: In this place which is desolate, forsaken ofman and beast, and in all the cities thereof, there shallagain be homesteads of shepherds with flocks reclining.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In the cities of the hill country, the lowland, and thesouth, in the district of Benjamin, the neighbourhood ofJerusalem, and the cities of Judah, flocks shall oncemore file past, to be counted under the hands (of theshepherds), saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise of the Ideal King or Messiah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Mark this, saith Jehovah; the days are coming when I willperform My gracious promise to the households of Israel andJudah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}In those days and at that time
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will raise up for David a righteous shoot,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who shall execute justice and right in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In those days shall Judah be crowned with salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Jerusalem in safety shall dwell:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And this is the name men shall call her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "Our champion is Jehovah."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise of the Perpetuity of the Davidic Dynasty and the Levitical Priesthood

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For thus saith Jehovah: David shall never want a man to situpon the throne of the house of Israel;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}neither shall theLevitical priests ever, for all time to come, want a man tooffer burnt-offerings in My presence or to burn oblations or todo sacrifice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Further, there came to Jeremiah this message from Jehovah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Thus saith Jehovah: Not until ye can annul My covenant withDay and Night, so that Day and Night shall come no more attheir appointed time \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}not until then shall My covenant beannulled with David My servant, that a son of his should reignupon his throne; or My covenant with the Levitical priests,My ministers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Numberless as the host of heaven, measurelessas the sand of the sea, shall I multiply the descendants ofDavid, My servant, and the Levitical priests, My ministers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Jeremiah received this further message from Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Hastthou observed what this people has been saying? They havesaid that Jehovah has cast off the two families of His choice,and in contempt for His people has ordained that they shall nolonger exist as a nation before Him?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Well, thus saithJehovah: As surely as I have created Day and Night anddetermined the order of heaven and earth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}so surely will I nevercast off the descendants of Jacob and of David My servant,or fail to select his descendants as rulers over the race ofAbraham, Isaac and Jacob; for I will have compassion uponthem and restore their fortunes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Incidents of the Siege of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jeremiah Warns Zedekiah of the Folly of Resisting Babylon

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 34}This message came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, whenNebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army,and all the kingdoms and nations of the earth thatwere under his dominion were fighting againstJerusalem and all the cities of Judah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saithJehovah, the God of Israel, Go to Zedekiah, king ofJudah, and say to him, Thus saith Jehovah: I amabout to deliver this city into the hands of the king ofBabylon, who will burn it with fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}As for thee, thoushalt not escape out of his hands: thou wilt assuredlybe seized and into his hands delivered: thou shalt seethe king of Babylon eye to eye, and speak to him faceto face, and to Babylon thou shalt go.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But listen,Zedekiah, king of Judah, to the message of Jehovah:Thus saith Jehovah concerning thee: Thou shalt notdie by the sword,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}but thou shalt die in peace. (Sweetspices) shall be burned for thee, as for thine ancestorsbefore thee, and lamentations shall be made for theewith "Ah! Lord," for I, saith Jehovah, have spokenthe word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then Jeremiah the prophet delivered this message toZedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}when the armyof the king of Babylon was fighting against Jerusalem,and all the cities of Judah that were left, and Lachishand Azekah \uc1\u8211* the only cities of Judah that remained asfortified cities.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Dishonest Attitude of the Jews to the Liberation of their
Slaves: To be Punished by the Liberation of Disaster upon Themselves
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah,after the King Zedekiah had covenanted with all the peoplein Jerusalem to make a proclamation of liberty \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}eachman to set free his Hebrew slave, whether male orfemale, so that no one of Jewish descent should serveas slave any longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now all the princes and all thepeople kept the covenant they had entered into toliberate their several male and female slaves and totreat them as slaves no longer: they kept it and setthem free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Afterwards, however, they turned andforced back into slavery the male and female slaveswhom they had liberated.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then there came to Jeremiah this message fromJehovah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel:When I brought your forefathers out of the land ofEgypt, that house of slavery, I Myself made thiscovenant{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}that at the end of six years they were torelease any Hebrew brother who had sold himself tothem \uc1\u8211* after six years of service, they were to set himfree: your forefathers, however, would not listenor incline their ear to Me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But you have in these daysacted in a very different spirit; you have done whatI desired in each proclaiming liberty to his (enslaved)neighbour; in My presence you made a covenantin the House that is called by My name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now,however, you have turned round and dishonoured Myname by forcing back again into slavery the severalmale and female slaves you had set free to dispose ofthemselves as they would.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Therefore thus saith Jehovah: You have disobeyedMy injunction to make a proclamation of liberty, each ofyou to his (enslaved) neighbour. Well, then, saithJehovah: You shall have your proclamation of libertyfrom Me \uc1\u8211* (liberty) to the sword, pestilence andfamine \uc1\u8211* and I will make you an object of consternationto every kingdom in the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As for the menthat broke the covenant they had made in My presence,when they passed between the pieces of the calf theyhad cut in two \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I mean the princes of Judah andJerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests and all the people ofthe land who passed between the pieces of the calfthey had cut in two \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I will deliver them into the handsof their enemies and of those that seek their life, andtheir dead bodies shall be devoured by the birds of theair and the beasts of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Further, Zedekiah,king of Judah, and his princes, I will deliver into thehands of their enemies and of those that seek their life,and into the hands of the army of the king of Babylonwhich (for the moment) has raised the siege and left you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Mark this well, saith Jehovah, I will issue My word ofcommand and bring them back to this city; theyshall assault it and take it and burn it with fire, and thecities of Judah I will turn into an uninhabited desolation.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Fidelity of the Rechabites contrasted with the Disobedience of the Jews

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 35}In the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king ofJudah, Jeremiah received the following message fromJehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Go to the clan of the Rechabites, talk withthem, bring them into one of the chambers (of theTemple) and offer them wine to drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So I tookJaazaniah, the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaz-ziniah,with his brothers and all his sons and the wholeRechabite clan,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and brought them into the Templechamber belonging to the sons of Hanan, the son ofYigdaliah, the man of God, that was adjacent to thechamber of the princes, above the chamber ofMaaseiah, the son of Shallum, the Keeper of theThreshold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I then set before the Rechabites bowlsfull of wine and cups and told them to drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}"No,"they said, "we will drink no wine; for Jonadab, theson of Rechab, our ancestor, laid a charge upon us andour children to drink no wine,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}to build no houses, to sowno seed, to plant and possess no vineyard for ever, but tospend all our days in tents, so that we might live long onthe land where as strangers we dwell.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In full obedience,therefore, to this charge of Jonadab, the son of Rechab,our ancestor, we have drunk no wine all our life long,neither we, nor our wives, nor our sons, nor ourdaughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We have built no houses to live in, wehave owned neither vineyard, field, nor seed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}butwe have lived in tents and faithfully fulfilled all theinstructions of our ancestors Jonadab.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}It was onlywhen the land was invaded by Nebuchadnezzar, kingof Babylon, that we decided to come to Jerusalem, toescape the Babylonian and Aramean armies; that iswhy we are (now) living in Jerusalem."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then there came to Jeremiah this message fromJehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}"Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel:Go and say to the men of Judah and the citizens ofJerusalem: Should this not be a lesson to you to obeyMy words, saith Jehovah?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The injunction thatJonadab the son of Rechab laid upon his sons todrink no wine has been steadily observed: in obedienceto that ancestral charge they have abstained to this day.But when I spoke to you early and late, you refusedto listen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Early and late I sent you all My servants theprophets with the message to each man of you that, ifyou would abandon your wicked ways, amend yourconduct, and no longer indulge in the service of othergods, you should continue in the land that I gave yourforefathers; but you would not incline your ear orlisten to Me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Unlike the descendants of Jonadab theson of Rechab, who have steadily observed the injunctionsof their ancestor, this people has refused tolisten to Me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,the God of Israel: See! I am about to bring uponJudah and upon all the citizens of Jerusalem all themisery with which I have threatened them, becausethey refused to listen to My words or respond to Mycall."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But to the clan of the Rechabites Jeremiah said,"Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel:Because you have obeyed the injunction of yourancestor Jonadab, keeping all his commandments andfulfiling all his instructions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jonadab, the son of Rechabshall never want a man to minister to Me, while theearth stands.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Prophecies Committed to Writing, Publicly Read in the Temple,
and Contemptuously Burned by King Jehoiakim
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 36}In the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah,king of Judah, Jeremiah received the following messagefrom Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Take a book-roll, and write on it allthe messages I have communicated to thee with regardto Israel and Judah and all nations, from My firstmessage to thee in the days of Josiah right on to thepresent day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}It may be that, when the people ofJudah hear of all the misery I am planning to bringupon them, they will severally abandon their wickedways, and receive at My hands pardon for their guiltand sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then Jeremiah summoned Baruch, the son of Neriah,who wrote down on a book-roll to Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s dictationall the messages Jehovah had communicated tohim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Thereafter Jeremiah gave instructions toBaruch in the following terms: "Seeing that I ampersonally under restraint and debarred from accessto the Temple,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}do you go and, on the day appointedfor fasting, read aloud in the Temple the messages ofJehovah in the hearing of the people from the rollwhich you have written to my dictation; read themalso in the hearing of the Judeans who come from theirrespective country towns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It may be that they willhumbly supplicate Jehovah, and severally abandontheir wicked ways: for great is the anger and furywith which Jehovah has threatened this people."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Inaccordance, therefore with his instructions fromJeremiah the prophet, Baruch read aloud from thebook the words of Jehovah in the Temple.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now in the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakimthe son of Josiah, king of Judah, a sacred fast wasproclaimed by all the people resident in Jerusalem,and all those also present from the country towns ofJudah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then in the hearing of all the people Baruchread from the book the messages of Jeremiah from theroom that belonged to Gemariah, the son of Shaphanthe Secretary of State, which was situated in the uppercourt at the entrance to the new Temple gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Nowwhen Micaiah, the son of Gemariah, the son ofShaphan, had heard the messages of Jehovah as theywere read from the book,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}he went down to the palaceto the room of the Secretary of State, and there he foundthe whole court seated \uc1\u8211* Elishama, the Secretary andDelaiah, the son of Shemaiah, and Elanthan, theson of Achbor, and Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, andZedekiah, the son of Hananiah, and indeed the wholecourt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Micaiah proceeded to inform them of all thewords he had heard Baruch read out of the book in thehearing of the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The whole court accordinglydespatched a messenger to Baruch, namely one Jehudi,the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son ofCushi, with instructions to Baruch to appear, bringingwith him the roll from which he had read in thehearing of the people. So Baruch, the son of Neriah,appeared before them with the roll in his hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then they told him to sit down and read it in theirhearing; so Baruch read while they listened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Whenthey had heard it all, they turned to one another inconsternation, exclaiming to Baruch that they werebound to inform the king of all this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They thenasked Baruch to explain how he had written all thesewords.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Baruch replied that Jeremiah had dictatedthem all to him, and he had written them down withink in the book.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}"Well, then," said the princes toBaruch, "go into hiding, you and Jeremiah, and letnobody know where you are."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}After they haddeposited the roll in the chamber of Elishama theSecretary, they visited the king in his apartment,and reported the whole matter to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The king then despatched Jehudi to fetch the roll;and, when he had brought it from Elishama\uc1\u8217*s chamber,he read it in the hearing of the king and of all thecourtiers who were in attendance upon him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Nowthe king was sitting in the winter house, and thefire on the brazier was burning before him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}andevery three or four columns that Jehudi read, the kingwould cut up with his penknife and fling into the firethat was on the brazier, till the whole roll was consumedin the fire that was on the brazier.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But therewas no sense of horror either on the part of the kingor of any of his ministers as they listened to all thesewords, nor did they rend their garments.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Elnathan,Delaiah, and Gemariah, however, had entreated theking not to burn the roll, but he would not listen tothem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then the king commanded the royal princeJerachmeel, and Seraiah, the son of Azriel, andShelemiah, the son of Abdeel, to fetch Baruch the scribeand Jeremiah the prophet; but Jehovah kept them inconcealment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}After the king had burned the roll containing thewords written by Baruch to Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s dictation,Jeremiah received this message from Jehovah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}"Oncemore take another roll, and write on it all the wordsthat were on the first roll that was consigned to theflames by Jehoiakim, king of Judah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Thus saithJehovah: Thou hast taken it upon thee to burn thisroll and to demand my reason for recording the threatthat the king of Babylon would assuredly come anddestroy this land, and clear it of man and beast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim, king ofJudah: Never a man shall he have to sit upon thethrone of David; his dead body shall be flung out andexposed to the heat of day and the cold of night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Iwill punish him, his descendants, and his ministers, fortheir sins; and I will bring upon them and upon thecitizens of Jerusalem all the misery with which Ithreatened them in vain."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Then Jeremiah took another roll and gave it toBaruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote on itto Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s dictation all the words of the book thathad been burned by Jehoiakim; and it was supplementedby many messages of a similar kind.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Experiences of Jeremiah During the Siege and at the Capture of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Warns King Zedekiah of the Impending Fate of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 37}Now Zedekiah the son of Josiah was reigning in placeof Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, having been set uponthe throne of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}but neither he nor his ministers nor the peopleof the land gave any heed to the messages Jehovahhad delivered by the prophet Jeremiah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}KingZedekiah, however, sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah,and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest toJeremiah, with the request that he would pray forthem to Jehovah their God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now Jeremiah, who hadnot yet been put in prison, was still coming andgoing among the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The Chaldeans who were engaged in the siege ofJerusalem, having received a report that Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*sarmy was advancing from Egypt, abandoned the siege.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then there came to Jeremiah this message fromJehovah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Thus saith Jehovah: Tell the king ofJudah who hath sent thee to consult Me, thatPharaoh\uc1\u8217*s army which is advancing to your aidshall return to Egypt to their own land;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and theChaldeans will come back and assault this cityand take it and burn it with fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thus saith Jehovah:Do not delude yourselves with the idea that the Chaldeanswill leave you for good: they will do nothing ofthe kind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For even if you defeated the wholeChaldean army that is fighting against you, so completelythat the only survivors were wounded men \uc1\u8211* aman to a tent\uc1\u8211* even they would rise up and burn thiscity with fire.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Arrested and Imprisoned

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When, in view of the advance of Pharoah\uc1\u8217*s army,the Chaldean forces had abandoned the siege ofJerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Jeremiah made a journey from Jerusalemto the district of Benjamin to receive his inheritanceamong the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He had just reached the Benjamingate when he was apprehended there by a sentrynamed Jirijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son ofHananiah, who called out, "You are deserting to theChaldeans."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}"It is false, said Jeremiah, "I amnot deserting to the Chaldeans." But Jirijah, refusingto listen, apprehended Jeremiah and brought himbefore the courtiers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}who in their exasperation hadJeremiah flogged and put in the house of Jonathan,the Secretary of State, which they had turned into aprison.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So Jeremiah found himself in the cells of thedungeon, where he remained for a considerable time.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Amelioration of Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Lot

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then King Zedekiah sent for him and questionedhim secretly in his house whether there was anycommunication from Jehovah. "There is," said Jeremiah;"you will be delivered into the hands of the king ofBabylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Further," said Jeremiah to the king,"what is my crime against you or your ministers orthis people that you have put me in prison?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Whereare your prophets (now) that assured you that the kingof Babylon would never invade this country?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Andnow I beseech your Majesty to listen with favour to mysupplication, and not to allow me to be taken backto the house of Jonathan the Secretary, where I amlikely to perish."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jeremiah was accordingly committedby royal command to the guard-court, and furnishedwith a loaf of bread a day from the Baker\uc1\u8217*s Street, tillall the bread in the city was consumed. So Jeremiahremained in the guard-court.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Accused of Treason, is Put into a Dungeon, from which he is
Rescued by Ebedmelech, a Foreigner
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 38}Now Shephatiah, the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah, theson of Pashhur, and Juca, the son of Shelemiah, andPashhur, the son of Malchiah, and heard Jeremiahaddressing all the people in words like these:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"Thussaith Jehovah: Whoever remains in this city shall dieby sword, famine and perstilence; but whoever goesover to the Chaldeans shall be spared, though he shallescape with nothing but his life."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Also, "Thus saithJehovah, This city shall most assuredly be deliveredinto the hands of the king of Babylon\uc1\u8217*s army, andit shall be captured."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Whereupon those courtierssaid to the king, "We petition you to have this fellowput to death: this sort of talk is unnerving all thepeople and the soldiers left in the city. This fellowdoes not want to help the city, but to ruin it."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}"Heis in your power," said the king; for he was helplessagainst them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So they took Jeremiah and, loweringhim with ropes, they threw him into the cistern of theroyal prince Malchiah, that was in the guard-court.There was no water in the cistern, but only mud;and Jeremiah sank in the mud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now it came to the ears of Ebedmelech, an Ethiopianeunuch attached to the palace, that they had putJeremiah in the cistern.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ebedmelech accordingly leftthe palace for the Benjamin gate where the kinghappened to be sitting at the time, and thus headdressed him:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}"Your Majesty, these men havebehaved most wrongfully in their treatment of Jeremiahthe prophet; they have flung him into the cistern andhe will die of hunger on the spot, for there is no morebread in the city."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At once the king orderedEbedmelech to take with him three me and pullJeremiah out of the cistern before he perished.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ebedmelech, accordingly, taking the men with him,went to the palace, and secured from (a lumber room)underneath the treasury some torn and tattered rags,and let them down by ropes to Jeremiah into thecistern.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then he told Jeremiah to put the torn andtattered rags under his armpits beneath the ropes;and Jeremiah did so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then they drew him up with theropes and pulled him out of the cistern; and Jeremiahremained in the guard-court.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Zedekiah Secretly Consults Jeremiah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}King Zedekiah afterwards sent and had Jeremiahbrought to him at the third entry that leads into theTemple; and the king said to Jeremiah, "I am goingto ask you a question which you are to answer meunreservedly."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}"If I tell you," said Jeremiah, "areyou not certain to put me to death? besides, any adviceI give you, you will simply disregard."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then, in secret,the king swore the following oath to Jeremiah, "AsJehovah liveth, who created this life of ours, I assureyou solemnly that I will neither put you to death nordeliver you into the hands of those men that are seekingyour life."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then said Jeremiah to Zedekiah,"Thus saith Jehovah, If you surrender voluntarily tothe officers of the king of Babylon, your life will bespared, and this city shall not be burned with fire, butyou and your family will be spared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If, however, yourefuse to surrender, then this city shall be deliveredinto the hands of the Chaldeans, who will burn it withfire; and you shall not escape from their hands."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then the king said to Jeremiah, "I am afraid of theJews who have gone over to them and subjected to violence."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}"No," said Jeremiah, "you will not be handed over.But I entreat you to listen to what I say \uc1\u8211* it is thevoice of Jehovah: your happiness and your life dependupon it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But if you refuse to surrender, then this isthe message revealed to me in a vision by Jehovah\uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}mark it well; (I saw) all the women that are left inthe palace of the king of Judah brought out to the chiefofficers of the king of Babylon, chanting the while thissong: Thy most excellent friends have beguiled And prevailed over thee, Thy feet they have thrust in the mire, And thus sinking have left thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}All your wives and children they shall bring out tothe Chaldeans, and you yourself shall not escape; youwill be seized by the hand of the king of Babylon; andthis city shall be burned with fire."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}"Well, then," said the king to him, "let nobodyknow anything of this conversation, or else you are a deadman.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}If the courtiers hear that I have been talkingwith you, and come and ask you to tell them unreservedly,on pain of death, what you have been sayingto the king and the king to you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}then just tell them thatyou were presenting a petition to the king that youshould not be taken back to Jonathan\uc1\u8217*s house, whereyou were in danger of perishing."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}In point of fact, thecourtiers did all come to Jeremiah and question him;and the story he told them was in entire accordancewith the king\uc1\u8217*s instructions. So they said no more tohim, for no part of the conversation had been heard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Jeremiah accordingly remained in the guard-courttill the day Jerusalem was taken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Capture of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 39}In the tenth month of the ninth year of Zedekiah,king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon camewith all his forces against Jerusalem and laid siege toit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}On the ninth day of the fourth month of theeleventh year of Zedekiah a breach was made in thecity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}All the chief officers ofthe king of Babylon came and took their seatsin the middle gate \uc1\u8211* Nergalsharezer the Rab-mag,Nebushazban the Rab-saris, and all the rest of theofficers of the king of Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On observing this, Zedekiah, king of Judah, andall the soldiers took to flight, leaving the city during thenight by way of the royal garden, by the gate betweenthe two walls, and they made for the Jordan valley.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But the Chaldean army pursued them and overtookZedekiah in the steppes of Jericho. They seized himand brought him to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,who was at Riblah in the district of Hamath, and he{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}pronounced judgment upon them. At Riblah theking of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before hiseyes, and all the noblemen of Judah also did the king{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}of Babylon slay. He then put out Zedekiah\uc1\u8217*s eyes,and loaded him with chains to carry him to Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The palace and the houses of the people the Chaldeansburned with fire, and the walls of Jerusalem they{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}demolished. The rest of the people that were left in thecity, and the deserters who had gone over to him, andthose that were left of the artificers, Nebuzaradan, thecommander of the guard, carried to exile in Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Some of the poor people who had nothing were left byNebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, in the landof Judah, and presented at the same time with vineyardsand fields.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}With regard to Jeremiah, Nebuchadnezzar, king ofBabylon, had instructed Nebuzaradan, the commander{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}of the guard, to do him no harm, but to take and lookwell after him and treat him according to his own{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}instructions. So a messenger was despatched fromNebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, andNebuzaradan, the Rab-saris, and Nergalsharezer, theRab-mag, and all the chief officers of the king ofBabylon.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Provision made for Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s safety after the Capture of Jerusalem
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They sent and hadJeremiah brought from the guard-court, and deliveredhim to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son ofShaphan, to be taken to his own home; so he stayedamong the people.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Gracious Promise to Ebedmelech

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}During Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s detention in the guard-court,there had come to him this message from Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Go and say to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, Thus saithJehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel: I will bring uponthis city all that I have said \uc1\u8211* for evil and not for good,and in that day it will be accomplished before thineeyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, saith Jehovah, I will deliver thee on thatday, and thou shalt not be given into the hands of themen thou dreadest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will save thee without fail;thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thou shalt escapewith thy life, because, saith Jehovah, thou hast putthy trust in Me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Experiences of Jeremiah After the Capture of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Elects to Remain in Palestine

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 40}The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovahafter he had been released from Ramah by Nebuzaradan,the commander of the guard, who had found himthere in chains among the captives of Jerusalem andJudah, who were being carried to exile in Babylon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The commander of the guard took Jeremiah and saidto him: "Jehovah, your God, pronounced this doomupon this place,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and He has kept His word. Youhave sinned against Him and refused to listen to Hisvoice, and so this thing is come upon you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But see now,I will release you at once from the chains on your hands.If you are disposed to accompany me to Babyloncome and I will look well after you; but if not, thenleave it alone. The whole land is before you; gowherever you choose and prefer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Go back to Gedaliah,the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the kingof Babylon has appointed Governor of the cities ofJudah: stay with him among the people or go whereveryou choose." Then the commander of the guarddismissed him with a gift of provisions and a present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Jeremiah went to Gedaliah at Mizpah, where hestayed with him among the people left in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Assassination of Gedaliah the Governor of Judah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When all the commanders of the forces in the openfield, together with their men, heard that the king ofBabylon had appointed Gedaliah Governor of the land,and charged him with the oversight of the men, womenand children, and of the poorest of the land, such ashad not been carried to exile in Babylon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}they camewith their men to Gedaliah at Mizpah \uc1\u8211* Ishmael theson of Nethaniah, Johanan and Jonathan the sons ofKareah, Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons ofEphai of Netophah, and Jezaniah, the son of theMaacathite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Gedaliah gave his oath to them andtheir men: "Don\uc1\u8217*t be afraid," he said, "of theChaldean officials. You will prosper if you stay in theland and serve the king of Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}As for myself,I will reside at Mizpah, to represent your interestswhen the Chaldean (officials) visit us; and you cangather wine, fruit, and oil, and store them up and livein the towns you take possession of."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Further, all theJews that were in Moab, Ammon, Edom, or elsewhere,when they heard that the king of Babylon had grantedpermission to some to remain in Judah and had appointedGedaliah the son of Ahikam Governor,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}theyall returned to Judah from all the places to which theyhad been driven \uc1\u8211* to Gedaliah at Mizpah \uc1\u8211* and theygathered immense stores of wine and fruit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Now Johanan the son of Kareah and all the commandersof the forces in the open field came to Gedaliahat Mizpah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and asked him whether he was awarethat Baalis king of Ammon had sent Ishmael the son ofNethaniah to assasiante him. But Gedaliah wouldnot believe it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Johanan, in a secret audience withGedaliah at Mizpah, said to him: "I beseech you toallow me to go and slay Ishmael. Nobody need know.Why should he take your life? that will mean thescattering of all the Jews that have gathered roundyou, and the ruin of all that is left of Judah."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}"No,"said Gedaliah to Johanan, "do nothing of the kind:what you say of Ishmael is not true."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 41}In the seventh month, however, Ishmael, the sonof Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, a member of theroyal family, accompanied by one of the chief officers ofthe king and ten (other) men, paid a visit to Gedaliahat Mizpah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}While they were all dining together there,Ishmael and the ten men who accompanied him roseand with the sword smote and slew Gedaliah, whom theking of Babylon had appointed Governor of the land,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}together with all the Jews who were with him inMizpah and all the Chaldean soldiers who happenedto be there.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Murder of Pilgrims and Flight of Gedaliah\uc1\u8217*s Assasin

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The day after the murder of Gedaliah, of which noone was yet aware,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}eighty pilgrims from Shechem,Shiloh, and Samaria, with beards shaven, clothes rentand gashes (on their bodies), came with vegetable offeringsand frankincense in their hand to present them atthe house of Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Ishmael went out from Mizpahto meet them, and they were weeping as they wentalong. When he meet them, he invited them to come toGedaliah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but when they were well within the town,he and the men who accompanied him slew them atthe cistern.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ten of their number, however, entreatedIshmael not to kill them: "for we have stores ofwheat," they said, "and barley, oil, and honey, buriedin the ground." So he let them alone and did notconsign them to the doom of their brethren.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Nowthe cistern into which Ishmael had cast all the corpsesof the men he had slain was the great cistern whichhad been constructed by king Asa in his war againstBaasha, king of Israel; and this Ishmael filled with theslain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Ishmael carried away captive all the rest of thepeople that were at Mizpah, the princesses and all thepeople left in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan, the commanderof the guard, had committed to the charge ofGedaliah, the son of Ahikam; and he started across toAmmon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But when Johanan the son of Kareah, andall the commanders of the forces that were with him,heard of all the atrocities perpetrated by Ishmael,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}theytook all their men and set out to attack him; and theyfound him by the great waters of Gibeon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13a}All thepeople with Ishmael \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14a}all that he had carried captivefrom Mizpah \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13b}when they saw Johanan and the commandersof the forces that were with him, were filledwith joy;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14b}and turning about, they came back and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}joined Johanan. But Ishmael, escaping with eightmen, repaired to Ammon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then Johanan and all the commanders of the forcesthat were with him, tool all the rest of the people whomIshmael had carried away captive from Mizpah, afterhis assassination of Gedaliah the son of Ahikam \uc1\u8211* men,women, and eunuchs, whom he had brought back fromGibeon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then they took their journey and stayedawhile at the sheepfolds of Chimham in the neighbourhoodof Bethlehem, from which they intended totravel to Egypt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}for they were in terror of theChaldeans, because Ishmael had assassinated Gedaliah,whom the king of Babylon had appointed Governor ofthe land.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Migration of the Jews to Egypt in Defiance of Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Counsel
{\cf1\f1\fs22 42}Then all the commanders of the forces, togetherwith Johanan, and Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah, andall the people great and small,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}approached Jeremiahthe prophet with a petition, which they commended tohis most favourable consideration, that he would prayfor them, remnant as they were, to Jehovah his God."We are left," they said, "but a few out of many, asyou see with your own eyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let Jehovah your Godtell us the way we should go and the things we should do."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Jeremiah replied, "I have heard you; I promise topray to Jehovah our God, as you request; and whateverbe Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s answer I will tell you unreservedly."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Whereupon they said to Jeremiah, "Jehovah be ourtrue and faithful Witness that we will act entirely inaccordance with any message that Jehovah your Godmay send us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We have sent you to Jehovah our God;and, be it welcome or unwelcome, we will obey Hisvoice, and so enjoy the prosperity that comes fromobedience to the voice of Jehovah our God."
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After an interval of ten days, Jeremiah received amessage from Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He accordingly summonedJohanan and all the commanders of the forces thatwere with him, and all the people, small and great,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and thus he addressed them. "Thus saith Jehovah,the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to present yoursupplication:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If you remain quietly in this land, I willbuild you up and not throw you down; I will plant youand not pluck you up: for I am grieved at the miseryI have brought upon you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You are afraid of the king ofBabylon, but do not be afraid of him, saith Jehovah;do not be afraid of him, for I will be with you, to saveyou and to deliver you from his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will havepity upon you and inspire him with pity for you, sothat he will allow you to remain in your own land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You may, however, disregard the voice of Jehovah yourGod, and refuse to remain in this land:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}you may say,\uc1\u8217*No; we will go to the land of Egypt, where we shallsee no war and hear no sound of trumpet and neversuffer for lack of bread \uc1\u8211* and there we shall make ourhome.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}In that case I call upon you that are left ofJudah to listen to the message of Jehovah. Thus saithJehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel: If you are reallydetermined to proceed to Egypt, and if you go and settlethere,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}then the sword that you fear shall overtake youthere in the land of Egypt, and the hunger that youdread shall cling to your heels there in Egypt, and thereye shall die;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and all the men that were determinedto go and settle in Egypt shall die by the sword, famine,and pestilence; not one shall survive or escape thedisaster that I will bring upon them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For thus saithJehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel: As Mine angerand fury have been poured out upon the inhabitants ofJerusalem, so shall My fury be poured out upon youwhen ye enter Egypt; and ye shall be an object ofexecration and horror, of cursing and scorn; and yeshall see this place no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This is Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s message to you that are left ofJudah: \uc1\u8217*Do not go to Egypt.\uc1\u8217* But now be very sureof this \uc1\u8211* I this day lay witness against you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}you havedone yourselves a grievous wrong. You have sentme to Jehovah your God with the request that I shouldpray for you to Jehovah, and promising to act inentire accordance with the will of Jehovah when Ideclared it to you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but when I did declare it this day,you refused to listen to the voice of Jehovah in respectof any part of my commission.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Now therefore be verysure of this, that ye shall die by the sword, famine,and pestilence, in the land where it is your desire togo and settle."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 43}When Jeremiah had finished addressing to theassembled people all these words with which Jehovahhad commissioned him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah,and Johanan the son of Kareah and all the defiant andinsolent men exclaimed to Jeremiah, "You are a liar;you have no commission to us from Jehovah to warnus against going and settling in Egypt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}but it is Baruchthe son of Neriah who is setting you on against us withthe object of delivering us into the hands of theChaldeans, to be killed or transported to Babylon."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Johanan and all the commanders of the forces andall the people refused to listen to the voice of Jehovahwhich urged them to remain in the land of Judah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Accordingly Johanan and all the commanders of theforces took all that were now left of Judah \uc1\u8211* those thathad come back from all the nations to which they hadbeen driven, to settle in the land of Judah \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}the men,the women, the princesses, and all the persons whomNebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, had leftin the charge of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the sonof Shaphan, including Jeremiah the prophet and Baruchthe son of Neriah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and, disregarding the voice ofJehovah, they went to Egypt and arrived at Daphnae.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Predicts the Conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In Daphnae Jeremiah received the following messagefrom Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}"Take large stones in thy hand andhide them away in secret at the porch of Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*sresidence in Daphnae in the presence of a few of themen of Judah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and say to them, Thus saith Jehovah:Mark this well \uc1\u8211* I will send and bring Nebuchadnezzarthe king of Babylon My servant, who shall set histhrone above these stones thou hast buried and spreadhis glistening tapestry over them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He shall come andsmite the land of Egypt, devoting to death thosedoomed to death, to captivity those doomed to captivity,to the sword those doomed to the sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He shallkindle a fire in the temples of the gods of Egypt, he shallclear the land of Egypt, as a shepherd clears his mantleof vermin, and then he shall depart from it in comfort.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Also he will shatter the obelisks of Bethshemesh, in theland of Egypt, and the temples of the gods of Egypt hewill burn with fire.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah Denounces the Jews in Egypt for their Idolatrous Worship of the Queen of Heaven

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 44}Concerning all the Jews whose home was in Egypt\uc1\u8211*at Migdol, Daphnae, Memphis, and in upper Egypt\uc1\u8211*Jeremiah received the following message:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"Thussaith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel: Ye haveseen with your own eyes all the misery that I havewrought upon Jerusalem and upon all the cities ofJudah. Ye see what they are to-day \uc1\u8211* desolate anduninhabited \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}as a consequence of their wickedbehaviour which provoked Mine indignation; for theywent and burned sacrifice in the service of other gods,unknown alike to them or to you or your forefathers;and that,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}though early and late I had been sending to youMy servants the prophets to warn you against theseabominable practices that I detest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But they refusedto listen or incline their ear: they would no abandontheir wickedness or cease sacrificing to other gods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Andso Mine anger and fury were poured forth: it blazed inthe cities of Judah and on the streets of Jerusalem, sothat they became the waste and the desolation thatthey are to-day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now, therefore, thus saith Jehovah, the God of Hosts,the God of Israel: Why are ye doing yourselves thisgreat wrong, which can only end in the utterextermination of Judah, man and woman, child and babe?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Why are ye vexing Me with the fabrications of yourhands, burning sacrifice to other gods in the land ofEgypt, where ye have come to settle? All thiscan only end in your extermination and in your beingcursed and scorned by every nation in the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Have you forgotten the crimes of your forefathers andof the kings and princes of Judah, the crimes, too,your own wives committed in the land of Judah and onthe streets of Jerusalem?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}To this day they haveremained unhumbled and unafraid. They have notlived in accordance with My law or with the statutesI set before you and your forefathers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God ofIsrael: Mark this \uc1\u8211* I will set My face against you forEvil, to exterminate Judah utterly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will take theremnant of Judah that were determined to come andsettle in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Egyptthey shall all be consumed; they shall fall by the swordand by famine; small and great, they shall die by thesword and by famine, and they shall be an object ofexecration and horror, of cursing and scorn;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and,as I have punished Jerusalem by sword, famine, andpestilence, so will I punish those that have made Egypttheir home,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}that not a man of the remnant of Judahwhich has come to settle in Egypt shall escape orsurvive to return to the land of Egypt for whichthey shall yearn; for none but a fugitive or twoshall return."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the great gathering, composed of all the menwho were aware that their wives burned sacrifice toother gods, and all the women that were standing by,replied to Jeremiah thus:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}"We refuse to listen to thismessage of yours that you have communicated to us inthe name of Jehovah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}but we will most assuredlykeep our solemn oath to burn sacrifice to the Queenof Heaven and to pour out drink-offerings in herhonour as we used to do \uc1\u8211* we and our fathers, ourkings and our princes, in the cities of Judah and on thestreets of Jerusalem. Then we had plenty of food, welived well and were untouched by misfortune.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Butever since the day we ceased burning sacrifice to theQueen of Heaven and pouring out drink-offerings inher honour, we have been utterly destitute, and swordand famine have consumed us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Yes," said the women,"as for our offering of sacrifice to the Queen of Heavenand pouring out drink-offerings in her honour \uc1\u8211* havewe not had the approval of our husbands in making cakesfor her stamped with her image, and in pouring herout drink-offerings?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Such was the answer of all the people, men andwomen. Then Jeremiah addressed them as follows:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}"Yes, you did indeed burn your sacrifices in the cities ofJudah and on the streets of Jerusalem \uc1\u8211* you and yourfathers, your kings and your princes and commons;and is it not precisely this that rankled in the mind andheart of Jehovah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}till He could bear your wicked andabominable conduct no longer, with the result that yourcountry is become the uninhabited desolation, thehorror, the curse that it is to-day?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}It is because youhave offered such sacrifices, sinning against Jehovah,disobeying the voice of Jehovah, refusing to live inaccordance with His laws. His statutes, His expressedwill: that is why the misery of to-day is come uponyou."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Further, Jeremiah said to the people and the womenassembled: "Listen to the message of Jehovah, all yeJews that are in the land of Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Thus saith Jehovahof Hosts, the God of Israel: Verily you womenhave indeed carried out your solemn resolve faithfullyto perform the vows you have taken upon you, to burnsacrifice to the Queen of Heaven and to pour outdrink-offerings in her honour. Well, then, keep your wordand perform your vows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But listen now to the world ofJehovah, all ye Jews who have made Egypt your home.Mark this well: I have sworn, saith Jehovah, by Mygreat name, that never again in all the land of Egyptshall My name be uttered by the lips of any man ofJudah in the oath \uc1\u8217*As truly as the Lord Jehovahliveth.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Mark! I am watching over them for eviland not for good; and every man of Judah in theland of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and byfamine, until there be an end of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Some whoescape the sword in Egypt shall return to Judah, butthey shall be few in number; and then all the remnantof Judah that have some to settle in Egypt shall knowwhose word it is that stands \uc1\u8211* Mine or theirs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And this, saith Jehovah, shall be to you the signthat I will punish you in this place, to teach you thatMy threats of disaster shall be confirmed upon you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Thus saith Jehovah: I will give Pharaoh Hophra, kingof Egypt, into the hands of his enemies and of those thatseek his life, as I gave Zedekiah, king of Judah, intothe hands of Nebuchadnezzar. king of Babylon, hisenemy that sought his life."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Words of Mingled Rebuke and Promise Addressed to Baruch

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 45}This is the message that Jeremiah the prophetdelivered to Baruch the son of Neriah, after he hadwritten these words in a book to Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s dictationin the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, kingof Judah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}"This, Baruch, is the message to thee fromJehovah, the God of Israel.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Thou hast said, \uc1\u8217*Woe is me! for Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to my pain hath added sorrow;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With groaning I am weary,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And I have found no rest.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let this be thy message to him, Thus saith Jehovah:When I must destroy what I built,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And when I must uproot what I planted,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Shalt thou seek great things for thyself?
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Seek them not; for, behold, I will bring
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On all flesh, saith Jehovah, disaster;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But thou, wheresoever thou comest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By My grace, shalt escape with thy life."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Oracles Against Foreign Nations

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Egypt

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 46}The message concerning the nations which Jeremiahthe prophet received from Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}On Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Concerning the army of Pharaoh Necho king of Egyptat Carchemish on the river Euphrates, where it wasdefeated by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, in thefourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king ofJudah.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Set the buckler and shield in array,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And draw nigh for the battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Set the buckler and shield in array,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And draw nigh for the battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4b}Harness the steeds, mount the chargers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Stand forth in your helmets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Polish your spears, don your breastplates.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why are they turned in dismay\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their warriors crushed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Fled apace without once looking backward,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By terror beset?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The swift cannot flee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nor the strong man escape:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 North by the banks of Euphrates
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They stumble and fall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Who is that rose up like the Nile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whose waters toss like floods?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It is Egypt that rose like the Nile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whose waters toll like floods.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 " I will rise, I will cover the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And destroy," said he, "her inhabitants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Up, steeds; rage, ye chariots;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And forth, ye warriors, march\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Cush and Put, that handle the shield,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And ye Ludim, that bend the bow."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But that day is the Lord Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A day of revenge on His foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When the sword shall devour to its fill,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And be drunken with their blood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah of Hosts hath a sacrifice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the northern land, by Euphrates.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Up to Gilead, fetch thee balsam.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O virgin daughter of Egypt;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In vain dost thou multiply medicines,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No healing is there for thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The nations have heard thy wail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the earth is full of thy cry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For warrior stumbles on warrior,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Both are fallen together.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The message of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet, thatNebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, would come andsmite the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Tell it Migdol,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Publish it in Memphis:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Say, "Take thy stand and prepare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the sword hath devoured round about thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Wherefore is Apus fled?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy mighty one held not his ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because down he was thrust by Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The strangers among thee are fallen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And prostrate, they say each to other,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Let us flee from the murderous sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let us rise and go back to our people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the land wherein we were born."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Call Pharaoh of Egypt "Blusterer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who hath let the hour go by."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As live, saith the King, whose name
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is Jehovah of Hosts: One shall come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like Tabor among the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or Carmel by the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O daughter that dwellest in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Prepare thee to go into exile;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Noph is become like a desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An uninhabited waste.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}A graceful heifer is Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But a wasp from the north hath assailed her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21e}For the day of disaster hath reached her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 f}The time of her visitation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 a}The warriors, too, that she hired,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 b}Were like unto fatted calves:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 c}As for them, together they turned
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 d}And fled, without making a stand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22a}She hisseth like a serpent
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 b}Against the advancing hosts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23c}For more are they than locusts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 d}So many they cannot be counted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22c}Against her they come with axes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like men that hew down trees,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23a}"Fell, saith Jehovah, "her forest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 b}For it is impenetrable,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Put to shame is the daughter of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To men from the north given over.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The God of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 See! Amon of Thebes I will punish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Pharaoh and those that trust him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}An I will deliver them over
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To those that seek their life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To the hands of Nebuchadnezzar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 King of Babylon, and his servants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But afterwards she shall be peopled
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As in days of old, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So fear them not, O Jacob My Servant;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O Israel, be not dismayed, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For see! I will save both thee and thine offspring
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the far distant land where captive ye lie.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And Jacob once more shall have quiet and ease
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In his own land, with no one to make him afraid;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So fear thou not, O Jacob My Servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For I, saith Jehovah, am with thee (to save thee).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 An end I will make of the nations\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of each, among whom I have driven thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But of thee I will not make an end.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will not leave wholly unpunished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But in measure I will chastise thee.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on the Philistines

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 47}The message concerning the Philistines whichJeremiah the prophet received from Jehovah, beforePharaoh smote Gaza.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the north, see! waters are rising,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They swell to a raging torrent:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will sweep o\uc1\u8217*er the land and its fulness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The city and (all) her inhabitants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Men shall utter a cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Those that dwell in the land shall howl.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}At the noise of the hoofs of his galloping steeds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At the rush of his chariots, the roar of his wheels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The father shall not look behind for the children;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For all unnerved shall they be\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Because of the day of destruction
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That cometh on all the Philistines,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Sweeping from Tyre and Sidon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All helpers that yet remain;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah shall work destruction
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On all that are left in the coast-land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Baldness is come upon Gaza,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ashkelon is destroyed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 O ye that are left of the Anakim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How long must ye gash yourselves yet?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}"Ah! Sword of Jehovah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How long will it be ere thou rest?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Into thy scabbard get thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And keep thee quiet and still."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But how can it be quiet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Since Jehovah hath given it a charge?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He hath destined it for Ashkelon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And for the shore washed by the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Moab

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 48}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Alas for the ruin of Nebo!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Kiriathaim is taken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Misgab is shamed and dismayed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The renown of Moab is vanished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In Heshbon they plotted her ruin:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 "Come, let us blot out the nation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou, Madmen, shalt be silenced,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The sword shall follow thee hard."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Hark! a shriek from Horonaim\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Havoc and fell destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Moab is destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The shriek can be heard far as Zoar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They climb the ascent to Luhith,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Weeping the while as they go;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the path that leads down to Horonaim
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is ringing with cries of destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Fly, escape for your lives,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Though like bare desert shrub shall ye be.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Thou hast trusted in thy strongholds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And therefore art thou taken:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Chemosh shall pass into exile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His priests and his princes together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Upon every city the spoiler shall come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No city shall escape;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The valleys shall also perish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the table-land be destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In accord with the word of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Give ye wings unto Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For fain would she fly away
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From her cities that shall be desolate
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And empty altogether.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Cursed be he that doeth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The work of Jehovah remissly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And cursed be he that keepeth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His sword from (shedding) blood.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}From his youth Moab been at ease,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On his lees he hath quietly rested\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not emptied from vessel to vessel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Nor ever to exile borne;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so his taste remaineth in him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And his scent is all unchanged.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore days, saith Jehovah, are coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When tilters I will send;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And they shall tilt him over
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And empty out his vessels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And dash his jars in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And the hopes of Moab in Chemosh
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall be utterly disappointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As Israel was disappointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In Bethel, wherein she trusted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}How can ye claim to be heroes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And mighty men of war,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When the spoiler of Moab is come up against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the flower of her youth is gone down to the slaughter?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saith the King, whose name is Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The ruin of Moab is night at hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her misery hasteth swiftly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Bemoan her, all ye her neighbours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All ye that know her name:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 say, "How is the strong staff broken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The rod that was so fair!"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Come down from thy splendour and sit in the mire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou daughter that dwellest in Dibon;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the spoiler of Moab is come up against thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy fortress he hath destroyed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Stand by the way and spy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O thou that dwellest in Aroer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ask of the fugitive men
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the women that flee, "What hath chanced?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}"Moab is put to shame:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 She is broken; howl ye and cry."
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Tell it by the Arnon that Moab is laid waste.Judgment is come upon the table-land \uc1\u8211* upon Holon,Jahzah, and Mephaath,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}upon Dibon, Nebo, and Beth-diblathaim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}upon Kiriathaim, Beth-gamul, and Beth-meon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}upon Keriyyoth and Bozrah, and all the citiesof the land of Moab, far and near.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Hewn off is the horn of Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And her arm is broken, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Make ye her drunken, for she
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath been insolent towards Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yeah, Moab hath clapped her hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And in turn shall she, too, be derided.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For didst thou hold Israel in derision? Hathshe then been detected in the company of thieves, thatthou shakest thy head so, every time thou speakest ofher?
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Leave the cities and dwell in the crags,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ye inhabitants of Moab;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And be like to the dove that nesteth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the holes of the rocks of the precipice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}We have heard of the pride of Moab\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How very proud is she\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of her crafty and arrogant pride,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the haughtiness of her heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Well I know her arrogance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The falseness of her boasting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the falseness of her behaviour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}There shall therefore be wailing in Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yea, shrieks from all quarters of Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And moans for the men of Kir-heres.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For thee, O vine of Sibmah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall be weeping as men weep for Jazer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thy branches passed over the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They reached as far as Jazer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On thy summer fruits and their vintage
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is the despoiler fallen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Gladness and mirth are vanished
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From Moab\uc1\u8217*s garden-land;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No wine is trod in the presses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The merry shout I have stilled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the shout that is raised is of battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Heshbon and Elealeh cry out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their voice doth reach unto Jahaz,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From Zoar to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyyah;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the waters of Nimrim shall also be desolate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}I will cause, saith Jehovah, to vanish from Moab
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Him that offereth in the high place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And doth sacrifice to his god.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}So my heart like a flute maketh moaning for Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My heart maketh moan for the men of Kir-heres;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the gain they had gotten is perished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For every head is bald,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And every beard is clipped:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On every hand are gashes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 On every loin is sackcloth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}On Moab\uc1\u8217*s roofs and squares
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is universal wailing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Moab I have shattered
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a vessel that one despiseth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}How broken is Moab! howl ye.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How she turneth her back in shame!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her neighbours shall all behold her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With horror and derision.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For thus saith Jehovah, Behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 One like a vulture shall swoop,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And spread out his swings against Moab.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Keriyyoth is taken, the strongholds are seized.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That day shall the heart of the warriors of Moab
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be like to the heart of a woman in anguish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}As a nation, Moab shall perish
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For his insolence towards Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Trap, terror, and pit are before you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All ye that dwell in Moab.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}He that flies from the terror shall fall down the pit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He that creeps from the pit shall be caught in the trap.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, this I will bring upon Moab
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the year of her visitation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}In the shadow of Heshbon stand fugitives\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All their strength now gone;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For a fire is gone forth from Heshbon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A flame from the house of Sihon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Devouring the temples of Moab\uc1\u8217*s head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the crown of the head of the sons of tumult.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Woe unto thee, O Moab!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The people of Chemosh is perished;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thy sons are taken captive,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thy daughters are led to captivity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet Moab I will restore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the latter days, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 Thus far is the judgment upon Moab.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Ammon

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 49}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hath Israel no sons, no heirs?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why then hath Milcom seized Gad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And his people inhabit her cities?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Therefore days, saith Jehovah, are coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When over Rabbah of Ammon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will bring the alarum of war.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A desolate mound shall she be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And with fire shall her daughters be burned;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And Israel shall hold once more
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The land from which she was driven.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Howl, ye children of Ammon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your capital is ruined;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And cry, ye daughters of Rabbah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Gird you with sackcloth and wail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And wander about in mourning;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Milcom is gone into exile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His priests and his princes together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Why gloriest thou in thy valley,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thou daughter that livest at ease;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And trustest in thy reserves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Thinking no one shall ever assail thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Behold, I will bring on thee terror,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saith the Lord Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From all that are round about thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ye shall all be driven headlong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the wanderers none shall rally.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But afterwards, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Ammonites I will restore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Edom
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On Edom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is wisdom no more in Teman?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is the wit of the prudent perished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their wisdom vanished clean?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Turn, fly to retreats inaccessible,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ye that dwell in Dedan;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I bring upon Esau his doom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The time of his visitation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Gleaners are come upon thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who will leave not a grape to glean;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, thieves in the night are come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who will wreck to their heart\uc1\u8217*s content.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For I have stripped Esau bare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And his lurking-place uncovered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 So that hide himself he cannot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Destroyed is he to a man
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By the arm of his brethren and neighbours.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Leave thine orphans, and I will preserve them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let thy widows trust in Me.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For thus saith Jehovah: If those who did notdeserve to drink the cup must drink it nevertheless,how canst thou expect to go utterly unpunished?Nay, verily, thou shalt no escape, but drink it thoushalt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For I have most solemnly sworn, saith Jehovah,that Bozrah shall be a horror, a scorn, and a curse,and all her cities shall be perpetual wastes.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Jehovah hath sent me tidings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of an envoy despatched to the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To bid them gather against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And rise up to do battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For small in the eyes of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yea, scorned among men, will I make thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}O how thou then wilt shudder!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The pride of thy heart hath beguiled thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou that hauntest the clefts of the crags,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That holdest the heights of the hills.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though thou buildest thine eyrie as high as the eagle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Even thence to the ground will I bring thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And Edom shall be a horror;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Yea, horror-struck, all that pass by her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall hiss at her many wounds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As when Sodom was overthrown,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And Gomorrah and her neighbours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No man shall dwell therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No mortal shall sojourn there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Behold, as a lion comes up
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the pastures of sheep from the jungle of Jordan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Even so will I chase them away, in a moment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And visit with vengeance their choicest rams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who is like Me? who will challenge Me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What shepherd is there that will face Me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Therefore hear what Jehovah hath planned against Edom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And purposed against the inhabitants of Teman:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The young shepherd lads shall be dragged away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their homestead assuredly smitten with horror.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}At the sound of their fall the earth doth tremble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And far as the Red Sea their cry shall be heard.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}See! one like a vulture shall swoop,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And spread out his wings against Bozrah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That day shall the heart of the warriors of Edom
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be like to the heart of a woman in anguish.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Damascus

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Hamath and Arpad are shamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For tidings of evil hath reached them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They melt for very care,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are restless, like the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Damascus is all unstrung,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 She betaketh herself to flight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Trembling hath seized upon her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Anguish hath taken hold of her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And sorrow like that of a woman in travail.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}How forlon is the famous city,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The city of wondrous charm!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}In her squares shall her young men lie fallen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her warriors all shall be silenced
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the palaces of Benhadad it shall devour.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Certain Arabian Tribes

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}On Kedar and the kingdom of Hazor, whichNebuchadnezzar king of Babylon smote.Thus saith Jehovah:Arise, get ye up unto Kedar,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Despoil the sons of the East,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Their tents and their flocks shall be taken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their hangings and all their vessels;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 (The foe) shall seize their camels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And shout at them "Terrors encircle you."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Turn, fly to retreats inaccessible,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ye that dwell in Hazor;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath purposed and planned to destroy you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}"Arise and assail the nation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That liveth in ease and security,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Strangers to gates and bars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And dwelling apart by themselves."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Their camels shall fall a prey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the throng of their herds shall be plundered;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And those whose temples are clipped
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will scatter to all the winds;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And I, saith Jehovah, will bring on them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ruin from every side.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}A haunt of jackals shall Hazor become,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A perpetual desolation:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No man shall dwell therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No mortal shall sojourn there.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Elam

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}The message concerning Elam which Jeremiah theprophet received from Jehovah at the beginning ofthe reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will break the bow of Elam,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Chief weapon of their might.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}I will bring four winds upon them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the four ends of the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And to all these winds will I scatter them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No nation shall there be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Where the outcasts of Elam shall come not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}I will fill them with dismay
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the presence of their foes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And of those that seek their life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And I will bring evil upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My glowing indignation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will send the sword to pursue them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Until I have consumed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I will set My throne in Elam,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And thence will I destroy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The king and the princes together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But Elam I will restore
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the latter days, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Oracle on Babylon

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 50}The message concerning Babylon and the land of theChaldeans that Jehovah communicated to Jeremiahthe prophet.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Tell ye the nations and publish it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Publish it unreservedly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That Babylon is taken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Bel shamed, and Marduk dismayed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her images are shamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her idol-blocks are dismayed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For a folk from the north hath assailed her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That shall desolate her land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So that none may dwell therein\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Man, beast, are fled and gone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In those days, at the time, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The children of Israel shall come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With the children of Judah together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall go on their way with weeping,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And seek Jehovah their God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For Zion shall they ask,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With faces hitherward turned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Saying, "Come, let us join Jehovah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In a covenant everlasting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That never shall be forgotten."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Lost sheep have My people been,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their shepherds have led them astray,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They have turned them away on the mountains;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From mountain to hill they have wandered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Forgetful of the fold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All have devoured them that found them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their enemies said "We are guiltless"\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they had offended Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Fold, where righteousness dwelleth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah, the Hope of their fathers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Flee ye from Babylon\uc1\u8217*s midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Get ye out from the land of Chaldea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like male goats before the flock.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For behold! I will rouse against Babylon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A swarm of northern nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That shall set their array against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Until they have overcome her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall shoot like a skilful warrior,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who doth not return empty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Chaldea shall be despoiled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All that spoil her shall have their fill.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Though ye rejoice and be glad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O ye that plunder My heritage;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though ye gambol like calves in the grass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And neigh like stalwart horses;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Your mother shall deeply be shamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And abashed shall she be that bore you\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The hindermost of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A wilderness dry and desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}An empty desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because of the wrath of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Horror-struck, all that pass by her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall hiss at her many wounds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Set your array round Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All ye that bend the bow;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shoot your arrows at her without stint,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 She hath sinned against Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Encircle her with your war-cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Already she hath surrendered;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her buttresses are fallen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her walls are torn down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Tis the vengeance of Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Avenge yourselves upon her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do to her as she hath done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Root out of Babylon him that soweth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And him that wieldeth the sickle in harvest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To escape the murderous sword
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall each set his face to his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And each to his own land flee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}A scattered flock is Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By lions driven away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 First, the king of Assyria devoured him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And now at the last his bones
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Have been gnawed by the king of Babylon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The God of Israel: Behold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will punish the king and the land of Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As I punished the king of Assyria.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But Israel I will bring back to his homestead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To pasture on Carmel and Bashan;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On Ephraim\uc1\u8217*s hills and in Gilead
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He shall fare to his heart\uc1\u8217*s content.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In those days, at that time, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Though Israel should be searched,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No guilt shall in her be found;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And no transgression in Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shall any man discover:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For those whom I spare I will pardon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Get ye up to the land of Marrati,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the people that dwell in Pekod;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Slay and destroy them utterly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And do all I command, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Hark! the alarum of war,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In Chaldea fell destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How is she hewn and shattered\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Hammer of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What a horror among the nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is Babylon become!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}I snared thee, and thou hast been taken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O Babylon, unaware:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thou art discovered and caught,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Because thou hast challenged Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Jehovah has opened His armoury,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And brought forth His weapons of wrath;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath a work to do in Chaldea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Assail her from every quarter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lay her granaries bare;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Pile her up like heaps of corn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And utterly detroy her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let nothing of her be left.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Slay ye all her bullocks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Down let them go to the slaughter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Woe unto them: for their day is come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The time of their visitation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Hark! how they flee, they escape
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Away from the land of Babylon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To Zion, to tell how Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Our God, hath avenged His Temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Call against Babylon archers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All those that bend the bow;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Camp round about against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let none of them escape.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Requite her for all she hath done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And deal with her as she dealt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For her insolence towards Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}In her squares shall her young men lie fallen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her warriors all shall be silenced,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}See, Insolence, I will assail thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saith the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because thy day is come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The time of thy visitation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Then shall Insolence stumble and fall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And none shall lift her up;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will kindle a fire in her forest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Which shall all her thickets devour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Thus saith Jehovah of Host:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The children of Israel are crushed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the children of Judah together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their captors hold them fast
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And refuse to let them go.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But mighty is their Redeemer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah of Hosts is His name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will surely defend their cause,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That He may give rest to the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And disquiet the people of Babylon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}A sword upon the Chaldeans,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Upon all the people of Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her princess and her wise men!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}A sword upon her diviners!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And then shall their folly be manifest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A sword upon her warriors!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And then how dismayed shall they be!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}A sword on her horses and chariots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And on all the strange folk in her midst!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they shall become as women.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A sword upon her treasures!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And plundered shall they be.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}A sword upon her waters!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And dried up shall they be!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For she is a land of images,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And with hideous (idols) they make themselves mad.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}So wild cats and wolves shall dwell there,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And there shall ostriches dwell;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 She shall not be re-peopled for ever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or dwelt in through all generations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}As when Sodom was overthrown,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Gomorrah and her neighbours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No man shall dwell therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No mortal shall sojourn there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}See! a pople doth come from the north:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A great nation and many kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the ends of the earth bestir them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Bow they wield and javelin\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Cruel and pitiless they,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With a voice like the roar of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And they upon horses come riding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Arrayed, like one man, for the battle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Against thee, O daughter of Babylon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}The rumour of them hath come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the ears of the king of Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And he is all unstrung;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Anguish hath seized upon him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And pangs as of woman in travail.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Behold, as a lion comes up
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the pastures of sheep from the jungle of Jordan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Even so will I chase them away in a moment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And visit with vengeance their choicest rams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who is like Me? Who will challenge Me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What shepherd is there that will face Me?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Therefore hear what Jehovah hath planned against Babylon,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And purposed against those that dwell in Chaldea:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The young shepherd lads shall be dragged away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their homestead assuredly stricken with horror.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}At the shout, " She is taken," the earth doth tremble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And over the world their cry shall be heard.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 51}Thus saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Behold, I will raise against Babylon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And those that dwell in Chaldea
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The spirit of a destroyer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will send upon Babylon winnowers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who shall winnow and empty her land :
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yea, woe shall beset her about
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the day of her disaster.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let the archer bend his bow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Stand erect in his coat of mail;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not one of her young men spare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But destroy her whole host utterly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let them fall down slain in the land of Chaldea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And stabbed upon her streets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5c}For their land is full of guilt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 d}Against the Holy One of Israel;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 a}But Israel and Judah were not forsaken
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 b}By their God, Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Fly from the midst of Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Save every man his life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lest her guilt bring destruction upon you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Tis Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s day of revenge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With a recompense He is requiting her.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A golden cup is Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That made the whole earth drunken:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The nations drank of her wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And therefore are they gone mad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On a sudden she falls, she is shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Raise ye your wail over her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Take balsam for her pain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Peradventure she may be healed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We strove for Babylon\uc1\u8217*s healing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But past all healing was she;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And so we now will leave her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And each to his own land go;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For her judgment reacheth to heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It mounts to the very clouds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Jehovah hath shown that the right was ours:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Come, let us tell in Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What Jehovah our God hath done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Polish the arrows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Furbish the shields;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah hath stirred up
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The spirit of Media\uc1\u8217*s king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He hath planned for the ruin of Babylon;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For such is Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s vengeance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The vengeance for His Temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Hoist ye the flag for the march
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Against the walls of Babylon;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Strengthen the watch, set watchmen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And get the ambush ready:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah hath planned and accomplished
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His treats on the people of Babylon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Thou that art rich in treasure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And dwellest by many waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thine end is come, thy web is spun.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Jehovah of Hosts hath most solemnly sworn:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 " I will fill thee with men who will swarm like locusts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And lift up against thee a shout of triumph.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He created the earth by His power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He established the world by His wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He stretched out the heavens by His skill.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When He uttereth His voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The waters roar in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And He causeth vapours to rise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the uttermost ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lightnings He made for the rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the wind He brings out of His storehouses.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}How foolish is man with his knowledge!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The goldsmith is shamed by his image;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His idols are a delusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And breath in them is none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They are an empty mockery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the hour of their trial they shall perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Not such is the Portion of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His God is the Framer of all things;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jehovah of Hosts is His name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My hammer of war hast thou been,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With thee I have shattered the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With thee have I kingdoms destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}With thee horse and rider I shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And chariot and charioteer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}With thee man and woman I shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With thee old and young have I shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With thee youth and maid have I shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}With thee flock and shepherd I shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With thee team and ploughman I shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With thee lord and viceroy I shattered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And Babylon I will requite,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the people of all Chaldea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Before your eyes, saith Jehovah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the wrong they have wrought upon Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Behold, I will assail thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Saith Jehovah, thou mount of destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That destroyest all the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will stretch out My hand against thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And make thee a burning mountain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}No cornerstones shalt thou furnish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And no foundation stones;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But thou, saith Jehovah, shalt be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A perpetual desolation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Raise a banner upon the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Blow the trumpet among the nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Prepare the nations against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Summon against her the kingdoms
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Muster your troops against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And bring up horses like locusts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Prepare the nations against her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 King, lords, and viceroys of Media,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all the land that he ruleth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The earth is in tremor and anguish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s design against Babylon standeth\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To make the land of Babylon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 An uninhabited waste.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The warriors of Babylon cease fight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They stay within their fastnesses;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their strength is all dried up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are become like women.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her dwelling-places are burned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her bars are shattered to pieces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Courier runs to meet courier,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And messenger to meet messenger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To tell the king of Babylon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That on all sides his city is taken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The ferries have been seized,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The defences are burned with fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And the men of war are confounded.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The God of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The daughter of Babylon is now
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like a threshing-floor, when it is trodden;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But yet a little while\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And for her shall the harvest-time come.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hath done me violent wrong:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He hath left me an empty vessel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He hath swallowed me up like a monster;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He hath filled his maw with my dainties,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And then hath cast me out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Let her that inhabiteth Zion declare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 "The wrong done to me and my flesh be on Babylon!"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let Jerusalem say, "My blood
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be on them that dwell in Chaldea!"
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Thus therefore saith Jehovah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 See! I will defend thy cause,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And I will take vengeance for thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her sea I will dry up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And her fountain I will wither.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Babylon shall become a ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A place that jackals haunt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A place of horror and hissing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A place where no man dwelleth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}They roar like young lions together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They growl like lions\uc1\u8217* whelps;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}I will give them the banquet they crave for,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And make them drunk, that they swoon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And sleep their eternal sleep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To awake nevermore, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}I will bring them down to the slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like the lambs or rams with goats.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}How is Sheshach seized and taken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 That was famous all over the world!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With what horror all the nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Are smitten at Babylon\uc1\u8217*s fate!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The sea came up upon Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8217*Neath the roar of her billows she sank.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Her cities were turned to a waste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 A dry and desert land:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In then shall no man dwell,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No mortal shall ever pass through them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}I will punish Bel in Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And make him disgorge what he swallowed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No more shall the nations stream to him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The wall of Babylon is fallen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Forth from her midst, My people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Save every man his life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From the glowing wrath of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}See that ye faint not nor fear
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At the rumours ye hear in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When one year one rumour cometh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And in the next another,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And tyrant after tyrant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Doeth violence in the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}See therefore, the days are coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When I will punish the idols of Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And put her whole land to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all shall fall slain in the midst of her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}The heavens shall rejoice over Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The earth, and all therein;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For spoilers shall come from the north
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And assail her, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Yes, Babylon must fall
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For Israel\uc1\u8217*s sons that are slain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As for Babylon are fallen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The slain of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Ye that the sword have escaped,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Depart ye, stand not still:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Remember Jehovah afar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And bethink ye of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}"We are shamed, we have heard a reproach,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And confusion hath covered our faces;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For strangers are entered in
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 To the Holy House of Jehovah."
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}See therefore, the days are coming
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When her images I will punish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And all through her land shall the wounded groan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Though Babylon mounted to heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And there in the heights built her fortress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet from me should despoilers come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And assail her, saith Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Hark! \uc1\u8217*tis a shriek from Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Fell destruction in Chaldea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}For Jehovah despoileth Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He stilleth her mighty voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall roar like many waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And utter their clamorous din;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}For the spoiler is come upon Babylon;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her mighty men are taken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their bows are broken in pieces:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Jehovah is a God of requitals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And He will repay without fail.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}Her princes I will make drunken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Her wise men and her governors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her viceroys and her warriors;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall sleep their eternal sleep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To awake nevermore, saith the King,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Whose name is Jehovah of Hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Babylon\uc1\u8217*s broad wall shall be razed to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And her towering gates in the fire shall be burned:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Thus endeth the toil of the peoples in nothing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The labour of nations is doomed to the flames.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Jeremiah\uc1\u8217*s Message to Babylon, Symbolic of her Doom

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}The instructions given by Jeremiah the prophet toSeraiah, the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, whoacted as quester-master, when he accompaniedZedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourthYear of his reign.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}Now Jeremiah had recorded on a scrollall the misery that was to come upon Babylon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}andhe said to Seraiah, "When you arrive at Babylon, seethat you read all these words,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}and say: \uc1\u8217*Thine, OJehovah, are these words; it is Thou that hast decreedthe destruction of this place \uc1\u8211* that never again shall itbe a home for man or beast, but that it shall remain adesolation for ever.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}When you have finished readingthis scroll, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middleof the Euphrates, with the words:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}\uc1\u8217*Thus shall Babylonsink, to rise no more, because of all the misery that Ishall bring upon her.\uc1\u8217*" Here end the words of Jeremiah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Capture of Jerusalem and the Exile of the People

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 52}Zedekiah, who was twenty-one years of age when hecame to the throne, reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem.His mother\uc1\u8217*s name was Hamutal, a daughter ofJeremiah of Libnah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}His actions were offensive toJehovah, exactly as Jehoiakim\uc1\u8217*s had been,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}andJehovah was so angry with Jerusalem and Judah thatHe cast them out of His sight; and Zedekiah revoltedagainst the king of Babylon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On the tenth day of the tenth month of the ninthyear of his reign Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,came with all his forces to storm Jerusalem. Theypitched their camp against it, and surrounded it witha siege-wall;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}so the city was under siege till the eleventhyear of king Zedekiah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In the ninth day of the fourthmonth \uc1\u8211* the famine in the city being so severe thatthere was no bread for the people of the land \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}abreach was made in the city, and all the soldiers tookto flight, leaving the city during the night by way of thegate between the two walls by the royal garden\uc1\u8211*the city being surrounded by the Chaldeans \uc1\u8211* and theymade for the Jordan valley.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But the Chaldean armypursued the king and overtook him in the steppes ofJericho, all his own army having left him and scattered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They seized the king and brought him to the king ofBabylon who was at Riblah in the district of Hamath;and he pronounced judgment upon him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At Riblahthe king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah beforehis eyes, and all the princes of Judah did he also slay;he then put out Zedekiah\uc1\u8217*s eyes,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and having loaded himwith chains, he carried him to Babylon, where he kepthim in the House of Discipline till the day of his death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On the tenth day of the fifth month of the nineteenthyear of king Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,Nebuzaradan the commander of the guard, one of theministers of the king of Babylon, entered Jerusalem;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and he proceeded to burn the Temple, the palace, andindeed every house in Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}All the walls thatencircled Jerusalem were demolished by the Chaldeanforces that were under the commander of the guard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The rest of the people left in the city, and the deserterswho had gone over the king of Babylon, and thosethat were left of the artificers, were carried into exile byNebuzaradan the commander of the guard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Some ofthe poorest of the country people were left by Nebuzaradan,the commander of the guard, to act as vine-dressersand ploughmen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The bronze pillars of the Temple, and the stands,and the bronze sea that was in the Temple, were brokenin pieces by the Chaldeans, and all the bronze of themwas taken to Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They also took the pots andthe shovels and the snuffers and the basons and thepans and all the bronze vessels used in the (Temple)service.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The goblets and the snuff-dishes (for thelamps) and the basons and the pots and the lamp-standsand the pans and the libation bowls \uc1\u8211* whateverwas of gold or silver respectively \uc1\u8211* were removed by thecommander of the guard: \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}the pillars, two; the seaone; and the bronze bulls that supported the sea,twelve; and the stands which King Solomon hadmade for the Temple, ten; \uc1\u8211* vessels the mass of whosebronze was beyond weight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Each of the pillars wastwenty-seven feet in height, eighteen feet in circumference,three inches in thickness, and hollow within.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}It was surmounted by a bronze capital, seven feet and ahalf in height, round which ran network and pomegranatesof bronze throughout; the (network and)pomegranate adorment of both pillars was alike.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Onthe network round about there were a hundred pomegranatesin all, of which ninety-six were visible.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The commander of the guard also took Seraiah thechief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and thethree keepers of the threshold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He took also from thecity a eunuch who had charge of the soldiers, and sevenof the King\uc1\u8217*s Privy Councillors who were found inthe city, and the secretary of the commander-in-chief,who kept the army register, and sixty of the people ofthe land whom he found within the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Havingseized them, Nebuzaradan, the commander of the guard,brought them to Riblah to the king of Babylon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and the king of Babylon put them to death at Riblahin the district of Hamath. Thus was Judah carriedfrom her own land into exile.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}These are the people whom Nebuchadnezzar carriedinto exile; in the seventeenth year (of his reign)three thousand and twenty-three Jews;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}in the eighteenthyear of Nebuchadnezzar, eight hundred andthirty-two persons from Jerusalem;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}in the twenty-thirdyear of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuzaradan thecommander of the guard carried seven hundred andforty-five Jews into exile: \uc1\u8211* in all, four thousandsix hundred.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A Gleam of Light in the Darkness of Exile

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}In the thirty seventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin,king of Judah, in the twenty-fifth day of the twelfthmonth, Evil-merodach, in the year of his accession tothe throne of Babylon, restored Jehoiachin, king ofJudah, to favour, liberated him from prison,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}engagedhim in friendly intercourse, and gave him precedenceover the (other) kings who were (detained) with himin Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He also changed his prison dress, and hedined at the royal table to the very end of his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Aperpetual allowance, which was disbursed daily, wasassigned him by the king of Babylon, and he continuedto enjoy it all his life up to the day that he died.
\par}

}