{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 John (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Good News According to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 John

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the beginning the Word was;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and the Word was with God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and the Word was God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He was in the beginning with God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}through him all things came into being,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and nothing came into being apart from him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}That which came into being in him was life;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and the life was the light of humanity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and the light shines in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and the darkness never overpowered it.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There appeared a man sent from God, whose name was John;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}he came as a witness \uc1\u8211* to bear witness to the light
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 so that through him everyone might believe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He was not the light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 but he came to bear witness to the light.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}That was the true light which enlightens everyone coming into the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He was in the world;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and through him the world came into being \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 yet the world did not know him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He came to his own \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 yet his own did not receive him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But to all who did receive him he gave power to become children of God \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 to those who believe in his name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For not to natural conception, nor to human instincts, nor to human will did they owe the new life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 but to God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the Word became human, and lived among us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 (We saw his glory \uc1\u8211* the glory of the Only Son sent from the Father),
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 full of love and truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}(John bears witness to him; he cried aloud \uc1\u8211* for it was he who spoke \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 \uc1\u8216*He who is coming after me is now before me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 for he was ever first\uc1\u8217*);
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}out of his fullness we have all received
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 gift after gift of love;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for the Law was given through Moses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 love and truth came through Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}No one has ever yet seen God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 God the only Son, who is ever with the Father \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he has revealed him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Preparation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When the religious authorities in Jerusalem sent some Priests and Levites to ask John \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who are you?\uc1\u8217*,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}he told them clearly and simply, \uc1\u8216*I am not the Christ.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*What then?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*Are you Elijah?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*I am not.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Are you \uc1\u8220*the prophet\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217* He answered, \uc1\u8216*No.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Who then are you?\uc1\u8217* they continued. \uc1\u8216*Tell us so that we have an answer to give to those who have sent us. What do you say about yourself?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*I,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*am \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness: make a straight road for the Lord\uc1\u8221*,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 as the prophet Isaiah said.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}These men had been sent from the Pharisees;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and their next question was, \uc1\u8216*Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ or Elijah or \uc1\u8220*the prophet\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}John\uc1\u8217*s answer was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I baptize with water, but among you stands one whom you do not know;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}he is coming after me, yet I am not worthy even to unfasten his sandal.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}This happened at Bethany, across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The next day John saw Jesus coming towards him, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Here is the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I was talking about him when I said \uc1\u8220*After me there is coming a man who ranks ahead of me, because before I was born he already was.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}I did not know who he was, but I have come baptizing with water to make him known to Israel.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}John also said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*I saw the Spirit come down from heaven like a dove and rest on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water, he said to me \uc1\u8220*He on whom you see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him \uc1\u8211* he it is who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}This I have seen myself, and I have declared my belief that he is the Son of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The next day, when John was standing with two of his disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}he looked at Jesus as he passed and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*There is the Lamb of God!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The two disciples heard him say this, and followed Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But Jesus turned round, and saw them following. \uc1\u8216*What are you looking for?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* they answered (or, as we should say, \uc1\u8220*Teacher\uc1\u8221*), \uc1\u8216*where are you staying?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Come, and you will see,\uc1\u8217* he replied. So they went, and saw where he was staying, and spent that day with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 It was then about four in the afternoon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}One of the two, who heard what John said and followed Jesus, was Andrew, Simon Peter\uc1\u8217*s brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}He first found his own brother Simon, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*We have found the Messiah!\uc1\u8217* (a word which means \uc1\u8220*Christ,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Consecrated\uc1\u8221*.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Then he brought him to Jesus. Looking straight at him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Cephas\uc1\u8217* (which means \uc1\u8220*Peter,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Rock\uc1\u8221*).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}The following day Jesus decided to leave for Galilee. He found Philip, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Philip was from Bethsaida, the same town as Andrew and Peter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}He found Nathanael and said to him, \uc1\u8216*We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the Law, and of whom the prophets also wrote \uc1\u8211* Jesus of Nazareth, Joseph\uc1\u8217*s son!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*Can anything good come out of Nazareth?\uc1\u8217* asked Nathanael. \uc1\u8216*Come and see,\uc1\u8217* replied Philip.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When Jesus saw Nathanael coming towards him, he said, \uc1\u8216*Here is a true Israelite, in whom there is no deceit!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*How do you know me?\uc1\u8217* asked Nathanael. \uc1\u8216*Even before Philip called you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* Nathanael exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*you are the Son of God, you are king of Israel!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}\uc1\u8216*Do you believe in me,\uc1\u8217* asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree? You will see greater things than those!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he added, \uc1\u8216*you will all see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Work in Judaea, Galilee and Samaria

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Two days after this there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and Jesus\uc1\u8217* mother was there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Jesus himself, too, with his disciples, was invited to the wedding.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, when the wine ran short, his mother said to him, \uc1\u8216*They have no wine left.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*What do you want with me?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*My time has not come yet.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}His mother said to the servants, \uc1\u8216*Do whatever he tells you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There were standing there six stone water-jars, in accordance with the Jewish rule of purification, each holding twenty or thirty gallons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Jesus said to the servants, \uc1\u8216*Fill the water-jars with water.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And, when they had filled them to the brim, he added, \uc1\u8216*Now take some out, and carry it to the Master of the feast.\uc1\u8217* The servants did so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, when the Master of the feast had tasted the water which had now become wine, not knowing where it had come from \uc1\u8211* although the servants who had taken out the water knew \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He called the groom and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Everyone puts good wine on the table first, and inferior wine afterwards, when his guests have drunk freely; but you have kept back the good wine till now!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This, the first sign of his mission, Jesus gave at Cana in Galilee, and by it revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}After this, Jesus went down to Capernaum \uc1\u8211* he, his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; but they stayed there only a few days.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then, as the Jewish Passover was near, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In the Temple Courts he found people who were selling bullocks, sheep, and pigeons, and the money changers at their counters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So he made a whip of cords, and drove them all out of the Temple Courts, and the sheep and bullocks as well; he scattered the money of the money changers, and overturned their tables,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and said to the pigeon-dealers, \uc1\u8216*Take these things away. Do not turn my Father\uc1\u8217*s house into a market house.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}His disciples remembered that scripture said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Passion for your house will consume me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then some of the religious authorities asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*What sign are you going to show us, since you act in this way?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Destroy this temple,\uc1\u8217* was his answer, \uc1\u8216*and I will raise it in three days.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*This Temple,\uc1\u8217* the authorities replied, \uc1\u8216*has been forty-six years in building, and are you going to \uc1\u8220*raise it in three days\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But Jesus was speaking of his body as a temple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Afterwards, when he had risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this; and they believed the passage of scripture, and the words which Jesus had spoken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}While Jesus was in Jerusalem, during the Passover Festival, many came to trust in him, when they saw the signs of his mission that he was giving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But Jesus did not put himself in their power because he knew what was in their hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He did not need anyone to tell him about people because he could read what was in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who was a leading man among his people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This man came to Jesus by night, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God; for no one could give such signs as you are giving, unless God were with him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Jesus, \uc1\u8216*unless a person is reborn, they cannot see the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*How can a person,\uc1\u8217* asked Nicodemus, \uc1\u8216*be born when they are old? Can they be born a second time?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*unless a person owes their birth to water and Spirit, they cannot enter the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}All that owes its birth to human nature is human, and all that owes its birth to the Spirit is spiritual.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Do not wonder at my telling you that you all need to be reborn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The wind blows wherever it wants, and you can hear the sound it makes, but you do not know where it comes from, or where it goes; it is the same with everyone who owes his birth to the Spirit.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*How can that be?\uc1\u8217* asked Nicodemus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*What! You a teacher of Israel,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and yet do not understand this!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In truth I tell you that we speak of what we know, and state what we have seen; and yet you do not accept our statements.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}If, when I tell you earthly things, you do not believe me, how will you believe me when I tell you of heavenly things?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No one has ascended to heaven, except him who descended from heaven \uc1\u8211* the Son of Man himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And, as Moses lifted up the snake in the desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him may not be lost, but have eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but so that the world might be saved through him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The person who believes in him escapes condemnation, while the person who does not believe in him is already condemned, because they have not believed in the only Son of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The ground of their condemnation is this, that though the light has come into the world, people preferred the darkness to the light, because their actions were wicked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For the person who lives an evil life hates the light, and will not come to it, fearing that their actions will be exposed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but the person who lives by the truth comes into the light, so it can be clearly seen that God is in all they do.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After this, Jesus went with his disciples into the country parts of Judea; and there he stayed with them, and baptized.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}John, also, was baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because there were many streams there; and people were constantly coming and being baptized.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}(For John had not yet been imprisoned).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now a discussion arose between some of John\uc1\u8217*s disciples and a fellow Jew on the subject of purification;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and the disciples came to John and said, \uc1\u8216*Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, and to whom you have yourself borne testimony \uc1\u8211* he, also, is baptizing, and everybody is going to him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}John\uc1\u8217*s answer was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*A person can gain nothing but what is given them from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You are yourselves witnesses that I said \uc1\u8220*I am not the Christ,\uc1\u8221* but \uc1\u8220*I have been sent before him as a messenger.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It is the groom who has the bride; but the groom\uc1\u8217*s friend, who stands by and listens to him, is filled with joy when he hears the groom\uc1\u8217*s voice. This joy I have felt to the full.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}He must become greater, and I less.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}He who comes from above is above all others; but a child of earth is earthly, and his teaching is earthly, too. He who comes from heaven is above all others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He states what he has seen and what he heard, and yet no one accepts his statement.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They who did accept his statement confirm the fact that God is true.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}For he whom God sent as his messenger gives us God\uc1\u8217*s own teaching, for God does not limit the gift of the Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The Father loves his Son, and has put everything in his hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The person who believes in the Son has eternal life, while a person who rejects the Son will not even see that life, but remains under God\uc1\u8217*s displeasure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Now, when the Master heard that the Pharisees had been told that he was making and baptizing more disciples than John{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}(Though it was not Jesus himself, but his disciples, who baptized),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}he left Judea, and set out again for Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He had to pass through Samaria,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, on his way, he came to a Samaritan town called Shechem, near the plot of land that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jacob\uc1\u8217*s Spring was there, and Jesus, being tired after his journey, sat down beside the spring, just as he was. It was then about midday.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A woman of Samaria came to draw water; and Jesus said to her \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Give me some to drink,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For his disciples had gone into the town to buy food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*How is it,\uc1\u8217* replied the Samaritan woman, \uc1\u8216*that you who are a Jew ask for water from a Samaritan woman like me?\uc1\u8217* (For Jews do not associate with Samaritans).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*If you knew of the gift of God,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and who it is that is saying to you \uc1\u8220*Give me some water,\uc1\u8221* you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*You have no bucket, Sir, and the well is deep,\uc1\u8217* she said. \uc1\u8216*Where did you get that \uc1\u8220*living water?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Surely you are not greater than our ancestor Jacob who gave us the well, and used to drink from it himself, and his sons, and his cattle!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*All who drink of this water,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*will be thirsty again;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}but whoever once drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst any more; but the water that I will give him will become a spring welling up within him \uc1\u8211* a source of eternal life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Give me this water, Sir,\uc1\u8217* said the woman, \uc1\u8216*so that I may not be thirsty, nor have to come all the way here to draw water.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Go and call your husband,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and then come back.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*I have no husband,\uc1\u8217* answered the woman. \uc1\u8216*You are right in saying \uc1\u8220*I have no husband,\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*For you have had five husbands, and the man with whom you are now living is not your husband; in saying that, you have spoken the truth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*I see, Sir, that you are a prophet!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the woman.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*It was on this mountain that our ancestors worshiped; and yet you Jews say that the proper place for worship is in Jerusalem.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Believe me,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*a time is coming when it will be neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem that you will worship the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}You Samaritans do not know what you worship; we know what we worship, for salvation comes from the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But a time is coming, indeed it is already here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father spiritually and truly; for such are the worshipers that the Father desires.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}God is Spirit; and those who worship him must worship spiritually and truly.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I know,\uc1\u8217* answered the woman, \uc1\u8216*that the Messiah, who is called the Christ, is coming; when once he has come, he will tell us everything.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*I am he,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to her, \uc1\u8216*I who am speaking to you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}At this moment his disciples came up, and were surprised to find him talking with a woman; but none of them asked \uc1\u8220*What do you want?\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Why are you talking with her?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So the woman, leaving her pitcher, went back to the town, and said to the people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Come and see someone who has told me everything that I have done. Can he be the Christ?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And the people left the town and went to see Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Meanwhile the disciples kept saying to him, \uc1\u8216*Take something to eat, Rabbi.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*I have food to eat,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*of which you know nothing.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Can anyone have brought him anything to eat?\uc1\u8217* the disciples said to one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*My food,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is to do the will of him who sent me, and to complete his work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Don\uc1\u8217*t you say that it still wants four months to harvest? Why, look up, and see how white the fields are for harvest!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Already the reaper is receiving wages and gathering in sheaves for eternal life, so that sower and reaper rejoice together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For here the proverb holds good \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*One sows, another reaps.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I have sent you to reap that on which you have spent no labour; others have laboured, and you have reaped the results of their labour.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Many from that town came to believe in Jesus \uc1\u8211* Samaritans though they were \uc1\u8211* because the woman had said, \uc1\u8220*He has told me everything that I have done.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}And, when these Samaritans had come to Jesus, they begged him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But far more came to believe in him because of what he said himself,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and they said to the woman, \uc1\u8216*It is no longer because of what you say that we believe in him, for we have heard him ourselves and know that he really is the Saviour of the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}After these two days Jesus went on to Galilee;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}for he himself declared that \uc1\u8220*a prophet is not honoured in his own country.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}When he entered Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, for they had seen all that he did at Jerusalem during the Festival, at which they also had been present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}So Jesus came again to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was one of the king\uc1\u8217*s officers whose son was lying ill at Capernaum.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When this man heard that Jesus had returned from Judea to Galilee, he went to him, and begged him to come down and cure his son; for he was at the point of death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Unless you all see signs and wonders, you will not believe.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*Sir,\uc1\u8217* said the officer, \uc1\u8216*come down before my child dies.\uc1\u8217* And Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Go, your son is living.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}The man believed what Jesus said to him, and went;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}and, while he was on his way down, his servants met him, and told him that his child was living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}So he asked them at what time the boy began to get better. \uc1\u8216*It was yesterday, about one o\uc1\u8217*clock,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*that the fever left him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}By this the father knew that it was at the very time when Jesus had said to him \uc1\u8220*Your son is living\uc1\u8221*; and he himself, with all his household, believed in Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}This was the second occasion on which Jesus gave a sign of his mission on coming from Judea to Galilee.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Sometime after this there was a Jewish Festival; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There is in Jerusalem, near the sheep-gate, a bath with five colonnades round it. It is called in Hebrew \uc1\u8220*Bethesda.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In these colonnades a large number of sick people were lying \uc1\u8211* blind, lame, and crippled.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}  Some later manuscripts add: for an angel of the Lord went down at certain times into the pool, and stirred up the water. The first person to step in after the stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease they had. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}One man who was there had been crippled for thirty-eight years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus saw the man lying there, and, finding that he had been in this state a long time, said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do you wish to be cured?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*I have no one, Sir,\uc1\u8217* the sick man answered, \uc1\u8216*to put me into the bath when there is a troubling of the water, and, while I am getting to it, someone else steps down before me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Stand up,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*take up your mat, and walk.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The man was cured immediately, and took up his mat and began walking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now it was the Sabbath. So the religious authorities said to the man who had been cured, \uc1\u8216*This is the Sabbath; you must not carry your mat.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*The man who cured me,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*said to me \uc1\u8220*Take up your mat and walk.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Who was it,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*that said to you \uc1\u8220*Take up your mat and walk\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But the man who had been restored did not know who it was; for Jesus had moved away, because there was a crowd there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Afterwards Jesus found the man in the Temple Courts, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*You are cured now; do not sin again, or something worse may happen to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The man went away, and told the authorities that it was Jesus who had cured him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And that was why they began to persecute Jesus \uc1\u8211* because he did things of this kind on the Sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*My Father works to this very hour, and I work also.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This made the authorities all the more eager to kill him, because not only was he doing away with the Sabbath, but he actually called God his own Father \uc1\u8211* putting himself on an equality with God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Jesus made this further reply, \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself; he does only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does, the Son does also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For the Father loves his Son, and shows him everything that he is doing; and he will show him still greater things \uc1\u8211* so that you will be filled with wonder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For, just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom he pleases.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The Father himself does not judge any one, but has entrusted the work of judging entirely to his Son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}so that everyone may honour the Son, just as they honour the Father. The person who does not honour the Son fails to honour the Father who sent him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}In truth I tell you that the person who listens to my message and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and does not come under condemnation, but has already passed out of death into life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}In truth I tell you that a time is coming, indeed it is already here, when the dead will listen to the voice of the Son of God, and when those who listen will live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For, just as the Father has inherent life within him, so also he has granted to the Son to have inherent life within him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and, because he is Son of Man, he has also given him authority to act as judge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Do not wonder at this; for the time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear his voice,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and will come out \uc1\u8211* those who have done good rising to life, and those who have lived evil lives rising for condemnation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I can do nothing of myself; I judge as I am taught; and the judgment that I give is just, because my aim is not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*If I bear testimony to myself, my testimony is not trustworthy;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}it is another who bears testimony to me, and I know that the testimony which he bears to me is trustworthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}You have yourselves sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But the testimony which I receive is not from people; I am saying this for your salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}He was the Lamp that was burning and shining, and you were ready to rejoice, for a time, in his light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But the testimony which I have is of greater weight than John\uc1\u8217*s; for the work that the Father has given me to carry out \uc1\u8211* the work that I am doing \uc1\u8211* is in itself proof that the Father has sent me as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The Father who has sent me has himself borne testimony to me. You have neither listened to his voice, not seen his form;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}and you have not taken his message home to your hearts, because you do not believe him whom he sent as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}You search the scriptures, because you think that you find in them immortal life; and, though it is those scriptures that bear testimony to me,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}you refuse to come to me to have life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*I do not receive honour from people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}but I know this of you, that you have not the love of God in your hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}I have come in my Father\uc1\u8217*s name, and you do not receive me; if another comes in his own name, you will receive him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}How can you believe in me, when you receive honour from one another and do not desire the honour which comes from the only God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; your accuser is Moses, on whom you have been resting your hopes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}For, had you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for it was of me that Moses wrote;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}but, if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my teaching?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}After this, Jesus crossed the Sea of Galilee \uc1\u8211* otherwise called the Lake of Tiberias.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}A great crowd of people, however, followed him, because they saw the signs of his mission in his work among those who were sick.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Jesus went up the hill, and sat down there with his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}It was near the time of the Jewish Festival of the Passover.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Looking up, and noticing that a great crowd was coming towards him, Jesus said to Philip, \uc1\u8216*Where are we to buy bread for these people to eat?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he meant to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Even if we spent a years\uc1\u8217* wages on bread,\uc1\u8217* answered Philip, \uc1\u8216*it would not be enough for each of them to have a little.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*There is a boy here,\uc1\u8217* said Andrew, another of his disciples, Simon Peter\uc1\u8217*s brother,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Who has five barley loaves and two fish; but what is that for so many?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Make the people sit down,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. It was a grassy spot; so the people, who numbered about five thousand, sat down,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and then Jesus took the loaves, and, after saying the thanksgiving, distributed them to those who were sitting down; and the same with the fish, giving the people as much as they wanted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When they were satisfied, Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Collect the broken pieces that are left, so that nothing may be wasted.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The disciples did so, and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves, which were left after all had eaten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When the people saw the signs which Jesus gave, they said, \uc1\u8216*This is certainly the prophet who was to come into the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But Jesus, having discovered that they were intending to come and carry him off to make him king, went again up the hill, quite alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, getting into a boat, began to cross to Capernaum. By this time darkness had set in, and Jesus had not yet come back to them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}the sea, too, was getting rough, for a strong wind was blowing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When they had rowed three or four miles, they caught sight of him walking on the water and approaching the boat, and they were frightened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*It is I; do not be afraid!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And after this they were glad to take him into the boat; and the boat at once arrived off the shore, for which they had been making.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The people who remained on the other side of the sea had seen that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not gone into it with his disciples, but that they had left without him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Some boats, however, had come from Tiberias, from near the spot where they had eaten the bread after the Master had said the thanksgiving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So, on the next day, when the people saw that Jesus was not there, or his disciples either, they themselves got into the boats, and went to Capernaum to look for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And, when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said, \uc1\u8216*When did you get here, Rabbi?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*it is not because of the signs which you saw that you are looking for me, but because you had the bread to eat and were satisfied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that lasts for eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you; for on him the Father \uc1\u8211* God himself \uc1\u8211* has set the seal of his approval.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*How,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*are we to do the work that God wants us to do?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*The work that God wants you to do,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is to believe in him whom God sent as his messenger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*What sign, then,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*are you giving, which we may see, and so believe you? What is the work that you are doing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Our ancestors had the manna to eat in the desert; as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He gave them bread from heaven to eat.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Moses did not give you the bread from heaven, but my Father does give you the true bread from heaven;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}for the bread that God gives is that which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*give us that bread always!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*I am the life-giving bread,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*whoever comes to me will never be hungry, and whoever believes in me will never thirst again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But, as I have said already, you have seen me, and yet you do not believe in me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}All those whom the Father gives me will come to me; and no one who comes to me will I ever turn away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}For I have come down from heaven, to do, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and his will is this \uc1\u8211* that I should not lose one of all those whom he has given me, but should raise them up at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For it is the will of my Father that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have immortal life; and I myself will raise him up at the Last day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}The people began murmuring against Jesus for saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I am the bread which came down from heaven.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*Is not this Jesus, Joseph\uc1\u8217*s son,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*whose father and mother we know? How is it that he now says that he has come down from heaven?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}\uc1\u8216*Do not murmur among yourselves,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus in reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8216*No one can come to me, unless the Father who sent me draws him to me; and I will raise him up at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}It is said in the prophets \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*And they will all be taught by God.\uc1\u8221* Everyone who is taught by the Father and learns from him comes to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Not that anyone has seen the Father, except him who is from God \uc1\u8211* he has seen the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}In truth I tell you, the person who believes in me has eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}I am the life-giving bread.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Your ancestors ate the manna in the desert, and yet died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}The bread that comes down from heaven is such that whoever eats of it will never die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}I am the living bread that has come down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, they will live for ever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}They began disputing with one another, \uc1\u8216*How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh to eat?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have not life within you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Everyone who takes my flesh for their food, and drinks my blood, has eternal life; and I will raise them up at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}For my flesh is true food, and my blood true drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Everyone who takes my flesh for their food, and drinks my blood, remains united to me, and I to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}As the living Father sent me as his messenger, and as I live because the Father lives, so the person who takes me for their food will live because I live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}That is the bread which has come down from heaven \uc1\u8211* not such as your ancestors ate, and yet died; the person who takes this bread for their food will live for ever.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}All this Jesus said in a synagogue, when he was teaching in Capernaum.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}On hearing it, many of his disciples said, \uc1\u8216*This is harsh doctrine! Who can bear to listen to it?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}But Jesus, aware that his disciples were murmuring about it, said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}\uc1\u8216*Is this a hindrance to you? What, then, if you should see the Son of Man ascending where he was before?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}It is the Spirit that gives life; human strength achieves nothing. In the teaching that I have been giving you there is Spirit and there is life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}Yet there are some of you who do not believe in me.\uc1\u8217* For Jesus knew from the first who they were that did not believe in him, and who it was that would betray him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}and he added, \uc1\u8216*This is why I told you that no one can come to me, unless enabled by the Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}After this many of his disciples drew back, and did not go about with him any longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}So Jesus said to the Twelve, \uc1\u8216*Do you also wish to leave me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}But Simon Peter answered, \uc1\u8216*Master, to whom would we go? Eternal life is in your teaching;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}and we have learned to believe and to know that you are the Holy One of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}\uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t I myself choose you to be the Twelve?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and yet, even of you, one is playing the devil\uc1\u8217*s part.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}He meant Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, who was about to betray him, though he was one of the Twelve.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}After this, Jesus went about in Galilee, for he would not do so in Judea, because the religious authorities (in Jerusalem) were eager to put him to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}his brothers said to him, \uc1\u8216*Leave this part of the country, and go into Judea, so that your disciples, as well as we, may see the work that you are doing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For no one does a thing privately, if they are seeking to be widely known. Since you do these things, you should show yourself publicly to the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For even his brothers did not believe in him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*My time,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is not come yet, but your time is always here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The world cannot hate you, but it does hate me, because I testify that its ways are evil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Go yourselves up to the Festival; I am not going to this Festival yet, because my time has not yet come.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After telling them this, he stayed on in Galilee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But, when his brothers had gone up to the Festival, Jesus also went up \uc1\u8211* not publicly, but privately.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The authorities were looking for him at the Festival and asking \uc1\u8220*Where is he?\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and there were many whispers about him among the people, some saying \uc1\u8220*He is a good man;\uc1\u8221* others, \uc1\u8220*No! He is leading the people astray.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No one, however, spoke freely about him, because they were afraid of the authorities.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}About the middle of the Festival week, Jesus went up into the Temple Courts, and began teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The authorities were astonished. \uc1\u8216*How has this man got his learning,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*when he has never studied?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So, in reply, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*My teaching is not my own; it is his who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If anyone has the will to do God\uc1\u8217*s will, they will find out whether my teaching is from God, or whether I speak on my own authority.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The person who speaks on their own authority seeks honour for themselves; but the one who seeks the honour of him who sent him is sincere, and there is nothing false in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Was not it Moses who gave you the Law? Yet not one of you obeys it! Why are you seeking to put me to death?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*You must be possessed by a demon!\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*Who is seeking to put you to death?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*There was one thing I did,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*at which you are all still wondering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But that is why Moses has instituted circumcision among you \uc1\u8211* not, indeed, that it began with him, but with our ancestors \uc1\u8211* and that is why you circumcise even on a Sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When a man receives circumcision on a Sabbath to prevent the Law of Moses from being broken, how can you be angry with me for making a man sound and well on a Sabbath?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Do not judge by appearances; judge justly.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}At this some of the people of Jerusalem exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Is not this the man who they are seeking to put to death?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Yet here he is, speaking out boldly, and they say nothing to him! Is it possible that our leading men have really discovered that he is the Christ?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Yet we know where this man is from; but, when the Christ comes, no one will be able to tell where he is from.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Therefore, Jesus, as he was teaching in the Temple Courts, raised his voice and said, \uc1\u8216*Yes; you know me and you know where I am from. Yet I have not come on my own authority, but he who sent me may be trusted; and him you do not know.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I do know him, for it is from him that I have come, and he sent me as his messenger.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}So they sought to arrest him; but no one touched him, for his time was not come yet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Many of the people, however, believed in him. \uc1\u8216*When the Christ comes,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*will he give more signs of his mission than this man has given?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The Pharisees heard the people whispering about him in this way, and so the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}at which Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*I will be with you but a little longer, and then I am going to him who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}You will look for me, and you will not find me; and you will not be able to come where I will be.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Where is this man going,\uc1\u8217* the people asked one another, \uc1\u8216*that we would not find him? Will he go to our countrymen abroad, and teach foreigners?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}What does he mean by saying \uc1\u8220*You will look for me, and you will not find me; and you will not be able to come where I will be\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}On the last and greatest day of the Festival, Jesus, who was standing by, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*If anyone is thirsty, they should come to me and drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}From the heart of those who believe in me will flow, as is said in scripture, rivers of living water.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}(By this he meant the Spirit, which those who had believed in him were to receive; for the Spirit had not yet come, because Jesus had not yet been exalted.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Some of the people, when they heard these words, said, \uc1\u8216*This is certainly the Prophet!\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}others said, \uc1\u8216*the Christ!\uc1\u8217*; but some asked, \uc1\u8216*What! Does the Christ come from Galilee?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Is not it said in scripture that it is of the descendants of David, and from Bethlehem, the village to which David belonged, that the Christ is to come?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}So there was a sharp division among the people because of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Some of them wanted to arrest him, and yet no one touched him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}When the officers returned to the chief priests and Pharisees, they were asked, \uc1\u8216*Why have you not brought him?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*No one ever spoke as he speaks!\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}\uc1\u8216*What! Have you been led astray too?\uc1\u8217* the Pharisees replied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*Have any of our leading men believed in him, or any of the Pharisees?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}As for these people who do not know the Law \uc1\u8211* they are cursed!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But one of their number, Nicodemus, who before this had been to see Jesus, said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}\uc1\u8216*Does our Law pass judgment on a person without first giving them a hearing, and finding out what they have been doing?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8216*Are you also from Galilee?\uc1\u8217* they retorted. \uc1\u8216*Search, and you will find that no prophet is to arise in Galilee!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}And everyone went home{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}except Jesus, who went to the Mount of Olives{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   This passage is inserted in some manuscripts from an ancient source, and found either after John 7:53 or after Luke 21:38 or elsewhere. }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But he went again into the Temple Courts early in the morning, and all the people came to him; and he sat down and taught them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Presently, however, the Teachers of the Law and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery, and placed her in the middle of the Court,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, this woman was found in the act of adultery.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now Moses, in the Law, commanded us to stone such women to death; what do you say?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They said this to test him, in order to have a charge to bring against him. But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on the ground with his finger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}However, as they continued asking him, he raised himself, and said, \uc1\u8216*Let the person among you who has never done wrong throw the first stone at her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When they heard that, they went out one by one, beginning with the eldest; and Jesus was left alone with the woman in the middle of the Court.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Raising himself, Jesus said to her, \uc1\u8216*Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*No one, Sir,\uc1\u8217* she answered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Neither do I condemn you,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus \uc1\u8216*go, and do not sin again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Jesus again addressed the people. \uc1\u8216*I am the light of the world,\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*The person who follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You are bearing testimony to yourself!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the Pharisees, \uc1\u8216*your testimony is not trustworthy.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Even if I bear testimony to myself,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*my testimony is trustworthy; for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you do not know where I come from, nor where I am going.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}You judge by appearances; I judge no one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yet, even if I were to judge, my judgment would be trustworthy; because I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Why, in your own Law it is said that the testimony of two persons is trustworthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I, who bear testimony to myself, am one, and the Father who sent me also bears testimony to me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Where is your father, then?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*You know neither me nor my Father,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus. \uc1\u8216*If you had known me, you would have also known my Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These statements Jesus made in the Treasury, while teaching in the Temple Courts. Yet no one arrested him, for his time had not then come.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus again spoke to the people. \uc1\u8216*I am going away,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and you will look for me, but you will die in your sin; you cannot come where I am going.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Is he going to kill himself,\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*that he says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You cannot go where I am going\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*You,\uc1\u8217* added Jesus, \uc1\u8216*are from below, I am from above; you are of this present world, I am not;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and so I told you that you would die in your sins, for, unless you believe that I am what I am, you will die in your sins.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*Who are you?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*Why ask exactly what I have been telling you?\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*I have still much that concerns you to speak of and to pass judgment on; yet he who sent me may be trusted, and I speak to the world only of the things which I have heard from him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They did not understand that he meant the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will understand that I am what I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but that I say just what the Father has taught me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Moreover, he who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone; for I always do what pleases him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}While he was speaking in this way, many came to believe in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}So Jesus went on to say to those who had believed him, \uc1\u8216*If you remain constant to my message, you are truly my disciples;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and you will find out the truth, and the truth will set you free.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*We are descendants of Abraham,\uc1\u8217* was their answer, \uc1\u8216*and have never yet been in slavery to anyone. What do you mean by saying \uc1\u8220*you will be set free\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*everyone who sins is a slave to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And a slave does not remain in the home always; but a son remains always.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}If, then, the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}I know that you are descendants of Abraham; yet you are seeking to put me to death, because my message finds no place in your hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I tell you what I have myself seen in the presence of my Father; and you, in the same way, do what you have learned from your father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Our father is Abraham,\uc1\u8217* was their answer. \uc1\u8216*If you are Abraham\uc1\u8217*s children,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*do what Abraham did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But, as it is, you are seeking to put me to death \uc1\u8211* a man who has told you the truth as he heard it from God. Abraham did not act in that way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}You are doing what your own father does.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We are not bastards,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*we have one Father \uc1\u8211* God himself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*If God were your Father,\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*you would have loved me, for I came out from God, and now am here; and I have not come of myself, but he sent me as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}How is it that you do not understand what I say? It is because you cannot bear to listen to my message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}As for you, you are children of your father the devil, and you are determined to do what your father loves to do. He was a murderer from the first, and did not stand by the truth, because there is no truth in him. Whenever he lies, he does what is natural to him; because he is a liar, and the father of lying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}But, as for me, it is because I speak the truth to you that you do not believe me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Which of you can convict me of sin? Why then don\uc1\u8217*t you believe me, if I am speaking truth?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The person who comes from God listens to God\uc1\u8217*s teaching; the reason why you do not listen is because you do not come from God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t we right, after all,\uc1\u8217* replied the people, \uc1\u8216*in saying that you are a Samaritan, and are possessed by a demon?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*I am not possessed by a demon,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*but I am honouring my Father; and yet you dishonour me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Not that I am seeking honour for myself; there is one who is seeking my honour, and he decides.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}In truth I tell you, if anyone lays my message to heart, he will never really die.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8216*Now we are sure that you are possessed by a demon,\uc1\u8217* the people replied. \uc1\u8216*Abraham died, and so did the prophets; and yet you say \uc1\u8220*If anyone lays my message to heart, they will never know death.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Are you greater than our ancestor Abraham, who died? And the prophets died too. Whom do you make yourself out to be?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}\uc1\u8216*If I do honour to myself,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*such honour counts for nothing. It is my Father who does me honour \uc1\u8211* and you say that he is your God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}and yet you have not learned to know him; but I know him; and, if I were to say that I do not know him, I should be a liar like you; but I do know him, and I lay his message to heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Your ancestor Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day; and he did see it, and was glad.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}\uc1\u8216*You are not fifty years old yet,\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*and have you seen Abraham?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*before Abraham existed I was.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}At this they took up stones to throw at him; but Jesus hid himself, and left the Temple Courts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}As Jesus passed by, he saw a man who had been blind from his birth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* asked his disciples, \uc1\u8216*who was it that sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Neither the man nor the parents,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but he was born blind so that the work of God should be made plain in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}We must do the work of him who sent me, while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Saying this, Jesus spat on the ground, made some paste with the saliva, and put it on the man\uc1\u8217*s eyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Go,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and wash your eyes in the Bath of Siloam\uc1\u8217* (a word which means \uc1\u8220*messenger\uc1\u8221*). So the man went and washed his eyes, and returned able to see.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}His neighbours, and those who had formerly known him by sight as a beggar, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Is not this the man who used to sit and beg?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* some said, \uc1\u8216*it is\uc1\u8217*; while others said, \uc1\u8216*No, but he is like him.\uc1\u8217* The man himself said, \uc1\u8216*I am he.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*How did you get your sight, then?\uc1\u8217* they asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*The man whom they call Jesus,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*made a paste, and anointed my eyes, and said to me \uc1\u8220*Go to Siloam and wash your eyes.\uc1\u8221* So I went and washed my eyes, and gained my sight.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Where is he?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*I do not know,\uc1\u8217* he answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They took the man, who had been blind, to the Pharisees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now it was a Sabbath when Jesus made the paste and gave him his sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the Pharisees also questioned the man as to how he had gained his sight. \uc1\u8216*He put a paste on my eyes,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*and I washed them, and I can see.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*The man cannot be from God,\uc1\u8217* said some of the Pharisees, \uc1\u8216*for he does not keep the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*How is it possible,\uc1\u8217* retorted others, \uc1\u8216*for a bad man to give signs like this?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So there was a difference of opinion among them, and they again questioned the man. \uc1\u8216*What do you yourself say about him, for it is to you that he has given sight?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The religious authorities, however, refused to believe that he had been blind and had gained his sight, until they had called his parents and questioned them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Is this your son,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*who you say was born blind? If so, how is it that he can see now?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*We know that this is our son,\uc1\u8217* answered the parents, \uc1\u8216*and that he was born blind;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but how it is that he can see now we do not know; nor do we know who it was that gave him his sight. Ask him \uc1\u8211* he is old enough \uc1\u8211* he will tell you about himself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}His parents spoke in this way because they were afraid of the authorities; for the authorities had already agreed that, if anyone should acknowledge Jesus as the Christ, he should be expelled from their synagogues.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}This was why his parents said \uc1\u8220*He is old enough; ask him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So the authorities again called the man who had been blind, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Give God the praise; we know that this is a bad man.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I know nothing about his being a bad man,\uc1\u8217* he replied. \uc1\u8216*One thing I do know, that although I was blind, now I can see.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*What did he do to you?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*How did he give you your sight?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*I told you just now,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Surely you also do not want to become his disciples?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*You are his disciple,\uc1\u8217* they retorted scornfully. \uc1\u8216*But we are disciples of Moses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}We know that God spoke to Moses; but, as for this man, we do not know where he comes from.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*Well,\uc1\u8217* the man replied, \uc1\u8216*this is very strange; you do not know where he comes from, and yet he has given me my sight!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}We know that God never listens to bad people, but, when a person is god-fearing and does God\uc1\u8217*s will, God listens to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Since the world began, such a thing was never heard of as anyone\uc1\u8217*s giving sight to a person born blind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}If this man had not been from God, he could not have done anything at all.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*You,\uc1\u8217* they retorted, \uc1\u8216*were born totally depraved; and are you trying to teach us?\uc1\u8217* So they expelled him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Jesus heard of their having put him out; and, when he had found the man, he asked, \uc1\u8216*Do you believe in the Son of Man?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Tell me who he is, Sir,\uc1\u8217* he replied, \uc1\u8216*so that I may believe in him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Not only have you seen him,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but it is he who is now speaking to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Then, Sir, I do believe,\uc1\u8217* said the man, bowing to the ground before him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*It was to put people to the test that I came into this world, in order that those that cannot see should see, and that those that can see should become blind.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Hearing this, some of the Pharisees who were with him said, \uc1\u8216*Then are we blind too?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*If you had been blind,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*you would have had no sin to answer for; but, as it is, you say \uc1\u8220*We can see,\uc1\u8221* and so your sin remains.{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}In truth I tell you, whoever does not go into the sheepfold through the door, but climbs up at some other place, that person is a thief and a robber;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}but the person who goes in through the door is shepherd to the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For him the watchman opens the door; and the sheep listen to his voice; and he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When he has brought them all out, he walks in front of them, and his sheep follow him, because they know his voice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They will not follow a stranger, but will run away from him; because they do not know a stranger\uc1\u8217*s voice.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}This was the allegory that Jesus told them, but they did not understand of what he was speaking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he continued, \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you, I am the door for the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All who came before me were thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not listen to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I am the door; he who goes in through me will be safe, and he will go in and out and find pasture.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The thief comes only to steal, to kill, and to destroy; I have come so that they may have life, and may have it in greater fullness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The hired man who is not a shepherd, and who does not own the sheep, when he sees a wolf coming, leaves them and runs away; then the wolf seizes them, and scatters the flock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He does this because he is only a hired man and does not care about the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am the good shepherd; and I know my sheep, and my sheep know me \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Just as the Father knows me and I know the Father \uc1\u8211* and I lay down my life for the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I have other sheep besides, which do not belong to this fold; I must lead them also, and they will listen to my voice; and they will become one flock under one shepherd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This is why the Father loves me, because I lay down my life \uc1\u8211* to receive it again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}No one took it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to receive it again. This is the command which I received from my Father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In consequence of these words a difference of opinion again arose among the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Many of them said, \uc1\u8216*He is possessed by a demon and is mad; why do you listen to him?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Others said, \uc1\u8216*This is not the teaching of one who is possessed by a demon. Can a demon give sight to the blind?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Soon after this the Festival of the Rededication was held at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}It was winter; and Jesus was walking in the Temple Courts, in the Colonnade of Solomon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}when the people gathered round him, and said, \uc1\u8216*How long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us so frankly.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I have told you so,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and you do not believe me. The work that I am doing in my Father\uc1\u8217*s name bears testimony to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But you do not believe me, because you are not of my flock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and I give them eternal life, and they will not be lost; nor will anyone snatch them out of my hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}What my Father has entrusted to me is more than all else; and no one can snatch anything out of the Father\uc1\u8217*s hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The Father and I are one.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Some of the people again brought stones to throw at him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and seeing this, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*I have done before your eyes many good actions, inspired by the Father; for which of them would you stone me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*It is not for any good action that we would stone you,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*but for blasphemy; and because you, who are only a man, make yourself out to be God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Are there not,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*these words in your Law \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I said, You are gods\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}If those to whom God\uc1\u8217*s word were addressed were said to be \uc1\u8220*gods\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* and scripture cannot be set aside \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}do you say of one whom the Father has consecrated and sent as his messenger to the world \uc1\u8220*You are blaspheming,\uc1\u8221* because I said \uc1\u8220*I am God\uc1\u8217*s Son\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}If I am not doing the work that my Father is doing, do not believe me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}if I am doing it, even though you do not believe me, believe what that work shows; so that you may understand, and understand more and more clearly, that the Father is in union with me, and I with the Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The authorities again sought to arrest him; but he escaped their hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then Jesus again crossed the Jordan to the place where John used to baptize at first, and stayed there some time, during which many people came to see him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*John gave no sign of his mission,\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*But everything that he said about this man was true.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}And many learned to believe in Jesus there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Now a man named Lazarus, of Bethany, was lying ill; he belonged to the same village as Mary and her sister Martha.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This Mary, whose brother Lazarus was ill, was the Mary who anointed the Master with perfume, and wiped his feet with her hair.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The sisters, therefore, sent this message to Jesus \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Master, your friend is ill\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and, when Jesus heard it, he said, \uc1\u8216*This illness is not to end in death, but is to redound to the honour of God, in order that the Son of God may be honoured through it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Jesus loved Martha and her sister, and Lazarus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yet, when he heard of the illness of Lazarus, he still stayed two days in the place where he was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then, after that, he said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Let us go to Judea again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* they replied, \uc1\u8216*the authorities there were but just now seeking to stone you; and are you going there again?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Are not there twelve hours in the day?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*If someone walks about in the daytime, they don\uc1\u8217*t stumble, because they can see the light of the sun;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but, if they walk about at night, they stumble, because they have not the light.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And, when he had said this, he added, \uc1\u8216*Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I am going so that I may wake him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*If he has fallen asleep, Master, he will get well,\uc1\u8217* said the disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But Jesus meant that he was dead; they, however, supposed that he was speaking of natural sleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he said to them plainly, \uc1\u8216*Lazarus is dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may learn to believe in me. But let us go to him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At this, Thomas, who was called \uc1\u8220*The Twin,\uc1\u8221* said to his fellow disciples, \uc1\u8216*Let us go too, so that we may die with him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When Jesus reached the place, he found that Lazarus had been four days in the tomb already.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Bethany being only about two miles from Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}a number of the people had come there to comfort Martha and Mary because of their brother\uc1\u8217*s death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary sat quietly at home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* Martha said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*if you had been here, my brother would not have died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Even now, I know that God will grant you whatever you ask him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Your brother will rise to life,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*I know that he will,\uc1\u8217* replied Martha, \uc1\u8216*in the resurrection at the Last day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I am the resurrection and the life,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*He who believes in me will live, though he die;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and he who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*Yes Master,\uc1\u8217* she answered. \uc1\u8216*I have learned to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}After saying this, Martha went and called her sister Mary, and whispered, \uc1\u8216*The teacher is here, and is asking for you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As soon as Mary heard that, she got up quickly, and went to meet him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jesus had not then come into the village, but was still at the place where Martha had met him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}So the people, who were in the house with Mary, comforting her, when they saw her get up quickly and go out, followed her, thinking that she was going to the tomb to weep there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}When Mary came where Jesus was and saw him, she threw herself at his feet. \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* she exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*if you had been here, my brother would not have died!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}When Jesus saw her weeping, and the people who had come with her weeping also, he groaned deeply, and was greatly distressed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Where have you buried him?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*Come and see, Master,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Jesus burst into tears.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*How he must have loved him!\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}but some of them said, \uc1\u8216*Could not this man, who gave sight to the blind man, have also prevented Lazarus from dying?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Again groaning inwardly, Jesus came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone lay against the mouth of it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Move the stone away,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* said Martha, the sister of the dead man, \uc1\u8216*by this time the smell must be offensive, for this is the fourth day since his death.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that, if you would believe in me, you should see the glory of God?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}So they moved the stone away; and Jesus, with uplifted eyes, said, \uc1\u8216*Father, I thank you that you have heard my prayer;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}I know that you always hear me; but I say this for the sake of the people standing near, so that they may believe that you has sent me as your messenger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then, after saying this, Jesus called in a loud voice, \uc1\u8216*Lazarus! Come out!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}The dead man came out, wrapped hand and foot in a winding-sheet; his face, too, had been wrapped in a cloth. \uc1\u8216*Set him free,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and let him go.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}In consequence of this, many of the people, who had come to visit Mary and had seen what Jesus did, put their faith in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Some of them, however, went to the Pharisees, and told them what he had done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The chief priests and the Pharisees called a meeting of the High Council, and said, \uc1\u8216*What are we to do, now that this man is giving so many signs?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}If we allow him to continue as we are doing, everyone will believe in him; and the Romans will come and will take from us both our Temple and our nation.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}One of them, however, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}\uc1\u8216*You are utterly mistaken. You do not consider that it is better for you that one person should die for the people, rather than the whole nation should be destroyed.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Now he did not say this of his own accord; but, as high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was to die for the nation \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}And not for the nation only, but also that he might unite in one body the children of God now scattered far and wide.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}So from that day they plotted to put Jesus to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}In consequence of this, Jesus did not go about publicly among the people any more, but left and went into the country bordering on the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, where he stayed with his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}But the Jewish Festival of the Passover was near; and many people had gone up from the country to Jerusalem, for their purification, before the Festival began.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}So they looked for Jesus there, and said to one another, as they stood in the Temple Courts, \uc1\u8216*What do you think? Do you think he will come to the Festival?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}The chief priests and the Pharisees had already issued orders that, if anyone learned where Jesus was, he should give information, so that they might arrest him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Last Days

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Six days before the Passover Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead, was living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There a supper was given in his honour at which Martha waited, while Lazarus was one of those present at the table.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Mary took a pound of choice spikenard perfume of great value, and anointed the feet of Jesus with it, and then wiped them with her hair. The whole house was filled with the scent of the perfume.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}One of the disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was about to betray Jesus, asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Why was not this perfume sold for a year\uc1\u8217*s wages, and the money given to poor people?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and, being in charge of the purse, used to take what was put in it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Leave her alone,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*so that she may keep it until the day when my body is being prepared for burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The poor you always have with you, but you will not always have me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now great numbers of people found out that Jesus was at Bethany; and they came there, not only because of him, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The chief priests, however, plotted to put Lazarus, as well as Jesus, to death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}because it was owing to him that many of the people had left them, and were becoming believers in Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On the following day great numbers of people who had come to the Festival, hearing that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem, took palm branches,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and went out to meet him, shouting as they went, \uc1\u8216*God save him! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord \uc1\u8211* the king of Israel!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Having found a young donkey, Jesus seated himself on it, in accordance with the passage of scripture \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*Fear not, people of Zion. Your king is coming to you, sitting on the foal of a donkey.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}His disciples did not understand all this at first; but, when Jesus had been exalted, then they remembered that these things had been said of him in scripture, and that they had done these things for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Meanwhile the people who were with him, when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead, were telling what they had seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This, indeed, was why the crowd met him \uc1\u8211* because people had heard that he had given this sign of his mission.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So the Pharisees said to one another, \uc1\u8216*You see that you are gaining nothing! Why, all the world has run after him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Among those who were going up to worship at the Festival were some Greeks,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}who went to Philip of Bethsaida in Galilee, and said, \uc1\u8216*Sir, we wish to see Jesus.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Philip went and told Andrew, and then together they went and told Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}This was his reply \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The time has come for the Son of Man to be exalted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}In truth I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains solitary; but, if it dies, it becomes fruitful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}A person who loves their life loses it; while someone who hates their life in the present world will preserve it for eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}If someone is ready to serve me, let them follow me; and where I am, there my servant will be also. If a person is ready to serve me, my Father will honour them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Now I am distressed at heart and what can I say? Father, bring me safe through this hour \uc1\u8211* yet it was for this reason that I came to this hour \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Father, honour your own name.\uc1\u8217* At this there came a voice from heaven, which said, \uc1\u8216*I have already honoured it, and I will honour it again.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The crowd of bystanders, who heard the sound, said that it was thundering. Others said, \uc1\u8216*An angel has been speaking to him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*It was not for my sake that the voice came,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but for yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Now this world is on its trial. Now the Spirit that is ruling this world will be driven out;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}By these words he indicated what death he was destined to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*We,\uc1\u8217* replied the people, \uc1\u8216*have learned from the Law that the Christ is to remain for ever; how is it, then, that you say that the Son of Man must be \uc1\u8220*lifted up\uc1\u8221* Who is this \uc1\u8220*Son of Man\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Only a little while longer,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*will you have the light among you. Travel on while you have the light, so that darkness may not overtake you; he who travels in the darkness does not know where he is going.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}While you still have the light, believe in the light, so that you may be children of light.\uc1\u8217* After he had said this, Jesus went away, and hid himself from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But, though Jesus had given so many signs of his mission before their eyes, they still did not believe in him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}in fulfilment of the words of the prophet Isaiah, where he says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Lord, who has believed our teaching? And to whom has the might of the Lord been revealed?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The reason why they were unable to believe is given by Isaiah elsewhere, in these words \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8220*He has blinded their eyes, and blunted their mind, so that they should not see with their eyes, and perceive with their mind, and turn \uc1\u8211* And I should heal them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Isaiah said this, because he saw Christ\uc1\u8217*s glory; and it was of him that he spoke.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Yet for all this, even among the leading men there were many who came to believe in Jesus; but, because of the Pharisees, they did not acknowledge it, because they were afraid that they should be expelled from their synagogues;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}for they valued honour from people more than honour from God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}But Jesus had proclaimed, \uc1\u8216*He who believes in me believes, not in me, but in him who sent me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}and he who sees me sees him who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}I have come as a light into the world, so that no one who believes in me should remain in the darkness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When anyone hears my teaching and pays no heed to it, I am not his judge; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}He who rejects me, and disregards my teaching, has a judge already \uc1\u8211* the message which I have delivered will itself be his judge at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}For I have not delivered it on my own authority; but the Father, who sent me, has himself given me his command as to what I should say, and what message I should deliver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}And I know that eternal life lies in keeping his command. Therefore, whatever I say, I say only what the Father has taught me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Before the Passover Festival began, Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave the world and go to the Father. He had loved those who were his own in the world, and he loved them to the last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The devil had already put the thought of betraying Jesus into the mind of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and at supper, Jesus \uc1\u8211* although knowing that the Father had put everything into his hands, and that he had come from God, and was to return to God \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}rose from his place, and, taking off his upper garments, tied a towel round his waist.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He then poured some water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples\uc1\u8217* feet, and to wipe them with the towel which was tied round him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When he came to Simon Peter, Peter said, \uc1\u8216*You, Master! Are you going to wash my feet?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*You do not understand now what I am doing,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but you will learn by and by.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*You will never wash my feet!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Peter. \uc1\u8216*Unless I wash you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*you have nothing in common with me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Then, Master, not my feet only,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Simon Peter, \uc1\u8216*but also my hands and my head.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*He who has bathed,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*has no need to wash, unless it be his feet, but is altogether clean; and you,\uc1\u8217* he said to the disciples, \uc1\u8216*are clean, yet not all of you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said \uc1\u8220*You are not all clean.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When he had washed their feet, and had put on his upper garments and taken his place, he spoke to them again. \uc1\u8216*Do you understand what I have been doing to you?\uc1\u8217* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You yourselves call me \uc1\u8220*the teacher\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*the Master\uc1\u8221*, and you are right, for I am both.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If I, then \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*the Master\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*the teacher\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another\uc1\u8217*s feet;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for I have given you an example, so that you may do just as I have done to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In truth I tell you, a servant is not greater than their master, neither is a messenger greater than the one who sends them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Now that you know these things, happy are you if you do them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I am not speaking about all of you. I know whom I have chosen; but this is in fulfilment of the words of scripture \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He that is eating my bread has lifted his heel against me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For the future I will tell you of things before they take place, so that, when they take place, you may believe that I am what I am.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In truth I tell you, the one who receives anyone that I send receives me; and the person who receives me receives him who sent me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}After saying this, Jesus was much troubled, and said solemnly, \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you that it is one of you who will betray me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The disciples looked at one another, wondering whom he meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Next to Jesus, in the place on his right hand, was one of his disciples, whom he loved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So Simon Peter made signs to that disciple, and whispered, \uc1\u8216*Tell me who it is that he means.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Being in this position, that disciple leant back on Jesus\uc1\u8217* shoulder, and asked him, \uc1\u8216*Who is it, Master?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*It is the one,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*to whom I will give a piece of bread after dipping it in the dish.\uc1\u8217* And, when Jesus had dipped the bread, he took it and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and it was then, after he had received it, that Satan took possession of him. So Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do at once what you are going to do.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But no one at the table understood why he said this to Judas.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Some thought that, as Judas kept the purse, Jesus meant that he was to buy some things needed for the Festival, or to give something to the poor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}After taking the piece of bread, Judas went out immediately; and it was night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When Judas had gone out, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Now the Son of Man has been exalted, and God has been exalted through him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and God will exalt him with himself \uc1\u8211* yes, he will exalt him forthwith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}My children, I am to be with you but a little while longer. You will look for me; and what I said to the people \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You cannot come where I am going\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* I now say to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}I give you a new commandment \uc1\u8211* love one another; love one another as I have loved you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}It is by this that everyone will recognise you as my disciples \uc1\u8211* by your loving one another.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Where are you going, Master?\uc1\u8217* asked Peter. \uc1\u8216*I am going where you cannot now follow me,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but you will follow me later.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Why cannot I follow you now, Master?\uc1\u8217* asked Peter. \uc1\u8216*I will lay down my life for you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Will you lay down your life for me?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus. \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you, the cock will not crow until you have disowned me three times.{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Do not let your hearts be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In my Father\uc1\u8217*s home there are many dwellings. If it had not been so, I should have told you, for I am going to prepare a place for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, since I go and prepare a place for you, I will return and take you to be with me, so that you may be where I am;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and you know the way to the place where I am going.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*We do not know where you are going, Master,\uc1\u8217* said Thomas. \uc1\u8216*So how can we know the way?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no one ever comes to the Father except through me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If you had recognised me, you would have known my Father also; for the future you will recognise him, indeed you have already seen him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Master, show us the Father,\uc1\u8217* said Philip, \uc1\u8216*and we will be satisfied.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Have I been all this time among you,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and yet you, Philip, have not recognised me? The person who has seen me has seen the Father, how can you say, then, \uc1\u8220*Show us the Father\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Don\uc1\u8217*t you believe that I am in union with the Father, and the Father with me? In giving you my teaching I am not speaking on my own authority; but the Father himself, always in union with me, does his own work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Believe me,\uc1\u8217* he said to them all, \uc1\u8216*when I say that I am in union with the Father and the Father with me, or else believe me because of the work itself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In truth I tell you, the person who believes in me will themselves do the work that I am doing; and they will do greater work still, because I am going to the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Whatever you ask, in my name, I will do, so that the Father may be honoured in the Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If you ask anything, in my name, I will do it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If you love me, you will lay my commands to heart,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and I will ask the Father, and he will give you another helper, to be with you always \uc1\u8211* the Spirit of truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The world cannot receive this Spirit, because it does not see him or recognise him, but you recognise him, because he is always with you, and is within you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will not leave you bereaved; I will come to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will still see me; because I am living, you will be living also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}At that time you will recognise that I am in union with the Father, and you with me, and I with you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It is they who have my commands and lays them to heart who loves me; and the person who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love them, and will reveal myself to them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*What has happened, Master,\uc1\u8217* said Judas (not Judas Iscariot), \uc1\u8216*that you are going to reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Whoever loves me,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*will lay my message to heart; and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The person who does not love me will not lay my message to heart; and the message to which you are listening is not my own, but comes from the Father who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I have told you all this while still with you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}but the helper \uc1\u8211* the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my name \uc1\u8211* will teach you all things, and will recall to your minds all that I have said to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Peace be with you! My own peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled, or dismayed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You heard me say that I was going away and would return to you. Had you loved me, you would have been glad that I was going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And this I have told you now before it happens, so that, when it does happen, you may still believe in me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I will not talk with you much more, for the Spirit that is ruling the world is coming. He has nothing in common with me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}but he is coming so that the world may see that I love the Father, and that I do as the Father commanded me. Come, let us be going.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}\uc1\u8216*I am the true vine, and my Father is the vine-grower.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Any unfruitful branch in me he takes away, and he cleanses every fruitful branch, so that it may bear more fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You are already clean because of the message that I have given you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Remain united to me, and I will remain united to you. As a branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it remains united to the vine; no more can you, unless you remain united to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I am the vine, you are the branches. If you remains united to me, while I remain united to you \uc1\u8211* you bear fruit plentifully; for you can do nothing apart from me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}If anyone does not remain united to me, they are thrown away, as a branch would be, and withers up. Such branches are collected and thrown into the fire, and are burnt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If you remain united to me, and my teaching remains in your hearts, ask whatever you wish, and it will be yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It is by your bearing fruit plentifully, and so showing yourselves my disciples, that my Father is honoured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; remain in my love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If you lay my commands to heart, you will remain in my love; just as I have laid the Father\uc1\u8217*s commands to heart and remain in his love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I have told you all this so that my own joy may be yours, and that your joy may be complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This is my command \uc1\u8211* love one another, as I have loved you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No one can give greater proof of love than by laying down their life for their friends.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And you are my friends, if you do what I command you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I no longer call you \uc1\u8220*servants,\uc1\u8221* because a servant does not know what their master is doing; but I have given you the name of \uc1\u8220*friends,\uc1\u8221* because I made known to you everything that I learned from my Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}It wasn\uc1\u8217*t you who chose me, but I who chose you, and I appointed you to go and bear fruit \uc1\u8211* fruit that should remain, so that the Father might grant you whatever you ask in my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I am giving you these commands that you may love one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If the world hates you, you know that it has first hated me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}If you belonged to the world, the world would love its own. Because you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world \uc1\u8211* that is why the world hates you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Remember what I said to you \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*A servant is not greater than their master.\uc1\u8221* If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have laid my message to heart, they will lay yours to heart also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But they will do all this to you, because you believe in my name, for they do not know him who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have had no sin to answer for; but as it is, they have no excuse for their sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The person who hates me hates my Father also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}If I had not done among them such work as no one else ever did, they would have had no sin to answer for; but, as it is, they have both seen and hated both me and my Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And so is fulfilled what is said in their Law \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They hated me without cause.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But, when the helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father \uc1\u8211* the Spirit of truth, who comes from the Father \uc1\u8211* will bear testimony to me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}yes, and you also are to bear testimony, because you have been with me from the first.{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}\uc1\u8216*I have spoken to you in this way so that you may not falter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They will expel you from their synagogues; indeed the time is coming when anyone who kills you will think that they are making an offering to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They will do this, because they have not learned to know the Father, or even me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But I have spoken to you of these things so that, when the time for them comes, you may remember that I told you about them myself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I did not tell you all this at first, because I was with you. But now I am to return to him who sent me; and yet not one of you asks me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Where are you going?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Although your hearts are full of sorrow at all that I have been saying to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Yet I am only telling you the truth; it is for your good that I should go away. For otherwise the helper will never come to you, but, if I leave you, I will send him to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And he, when he comes, will bring conviction to the world as to sin, and as to righteousness, and as to judgment;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}as to sin, for people do not believe in me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}as to righteousness, for I am going to the Father, and you will see me no longer;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}as to judgment, for the Spirit that is ruling this world has been condemned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I have still much to say to you, but you cannot bear it now.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yet when he \uc1\u8211* The Spirit of truth \uc1\u8211* comes, he will guide you into all truth; for he will not speak on his own authority, but he will speak of all that he hears; and he will tell you of the things that are to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He will honour me; because he will take of what is mine, and will tell it to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Everything that the Father has is mine; that is why I said that he takes of what is mine, and will tell it to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In a little while you will no longer see me; and then in a little while you will see me indeed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At this some of his disciples said to one another, \uc1\u8216*What does he mean by saying to us \uc1\u8220*In a little while you will not see me, and then in a little while you will see me indeed\uc1\u8221*; and by saying \uc1\u8220*Because I am going to the Father\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}What does he mean by \uc1\u8220*In a little while\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*We do not know what he is speaking about.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus saw that they were wanting to ask him a question, and said, \uc1\u8216*Are you trying to find out from one another what I meant by saying \uc1\u8220*In a little while you will not see me; and then in a little while you will see me indeed\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In truth I tell you that you will weep and mourn, but the world will rejoice; you will suffer pain, but your pain will turn to joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}A woman in labour is in pain because her time has come; but no sooner is the child born, than she forgets her trouble in her joy that a child has been born into the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}You, in the same way, are sorry now; but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will rob you of your joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And at that time you will not ask me anything; in truth I tell you, if you ask the Father for anything, he will grant it to you in my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So far you have not asked for anything, in my name; ask, and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I have spoken to you of all this in figures; a time is coming, however, when I will not speak any longer to you in figures, but will tell you about the Father plainly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}You will ask, at that time, in my name; and I do not say that I will intercede with the Father for you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came from the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I came out from the Father, and have come into the world; and now I am to leave the world, and go to the Father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*At last,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the disciples, \uc1\u8216*you are using plain words and not speaking in figures at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Now we are sure that you know everything, and need not wait for anyone to question you. This makes us believe that you did come from God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Do you believe that already?\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*Listen! A time is coming \uc1\u8211* indeed it has already come \uc1\u8211* when you are to be scattered, each going his own way, and to leave me alone; and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I have spoken to you in this way, so that in me you may find peace. In the world you will find trouble; yet, take courage! I have conquered the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}After saying this, Jesus raised his eyes heavenwards, and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Father, the hour has come; honour your Son, so that your Son may honour you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}even as you gave him power over all humanity, so that he should give eternal life to everyone you have given him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And the eternal life is this \uc1\u8211* to know you the one true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I have honoured you on earth by completing the work which you have given me to do;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and now do you honour me, Father, at your own side, with the honour which I had at your side before the world began.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I have revealed you to those whom you gave me from the world; they were your own, and you gave them to me; and they have laid your message to heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They recognise now that everything that you gave me was from you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for I have given them the teaching which you gave me, and they received it, and clearly understood that I came from you, and they believed that you have sent me as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I intercede for them; I am not interceding for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are your own \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}All that is mine is yours, and all that is yours is mine \uc1\u8211* and I am honoured in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now I am to be in this world no longer, but they are still to be in the world, and I am to come to you. Holy Father, keep them by that revelation of your name which you have given me, so that they may be one, as we are.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}While I was with them, I kept them by that revelation, and I have guarded them; and not one of them has been lost, except that lost soul \uc1\u8211* in fulfilment of scripture.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But now I am to come to you; and I am speaking like this, while still in the world, so that they may have my own joy, in all its fullness, in their hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I have given them your message; and the world hated them, because they do not belong to the world, even as I do not belong to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I do not ask you to take them out of the world, but to keep them from evil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They do not belong to the world, even as I do not belong to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Consecrate them by the truth; your message is truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Just as you have sent me as your messenger to the world, so I send them as my messengers to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And it is for their sakes that I am consecrating myself, so that they also may be truly consecrated.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But it is not only for them that I am interceding, but also for those who believe in me through their message,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}that they all may be one \uc1\u8211* that as you, Father, are in union with us \uc1\u8211* and so the world may believe that you have sent me as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I have given them the honour which you have given me, so that they may be one as we are one \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}I in union with them and you with me \uc1\u8211* so that they may be perfected in their union, and so that the world may know that you have sent me as your messenger, and that you have loved them as you have loved me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Father, my desire for all those whom you have given me is that they may be with me where I am, so that they may see the honour which you have given me; for you did love me before the beginning of the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Righteous Father, though the world did not know you, I knew you; and these people knew that you have sent me as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I have made you known to them, and will do so still; that the love that you have had for me may be in their hearts, and that I may be in them also.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}When Jesus had said this, he went out with his disciples and crossed the Kidron ravine to a place where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples went.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The place was well known to Judas, the betrayer, for Jesus and his disciples had often met there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Judas, who had obtained the soldiers of the Roman garrison, and some guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Jesus, aware of all that was coming upon him, went to meet them, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*For whom are you looking?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Jesus of Nazareth,\uc1\u8217* was their answer. \uc1\u8216*I am he,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. (Judas, the betrayer, was also standing with them.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When Jesus said \uc1\u8220*I am he,\uc1\u8221* they drew back and fell to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he again asked for whom they were looking, and they answered, \uc1\u8216*Jesus of Nazareth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*I have already told you that I am he,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*so, if it is for me that you are looking, let these people go.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This was in fulfilment of his words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Of those whom you have given me I have not lost one.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At this, Simon Peter, who had a sword with him, drew it, and struck the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant\uc1\u8217*s name was Malchus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Jesus said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*Sheathe your sword. Should I not drink the cup which the Father has given me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So the soldiers of the garrison, with their commanding officer and the Jewish guards, arrested Jesus and bound him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and took him first of all to Annas. Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was Caiaphas who had counselled the religious authorities, that it was best that one person should die for the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Meanwhile Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. That disciple, being well-known to the high priest, went with Jesus into the high priest\uc1\u8217*s courtyard,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}while Peter stood outside by the door. Presently the other disciple \uc1\u8211* the one well-known to the high priest \uc1\u8211* went out and spoke to the portress, and brought Peter in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So the maidservant said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you also one of this man\uc1\u8217*s disciples?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No, I am not,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The servants and guards were standing round a charcoal fire (which they had made because it was cold), and were warming themselves. Peter, too, was with them, standing and warming himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*For my part,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*I have spoken to all the world openly. I always taught in some synagogue, or in the Temple Courts, places where everyone assembles, and I never spoke of anything in secret.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Why question me? Question those who have listened to me as to what I have spoken about to them. They must know what I said.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When Jesus said this, one of the guards, who was standing near, gave him a blow with his hand. \uc1\u8216*Do you answer the high priest like that?\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*If I said anything wrong, give evidence about it,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but if not, why do you strike me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile Simon Peter was standing there, warming himself; so they said to him, \uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you also one of his disciples?\uc1\u8217* Peter denied it. \uc1\u8216*No, I am not,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}One of the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servants, a relation of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t I myself see you with him in the garden?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Peter again denied it; and at that moment a cock crowed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}From Caiaphas they took Jesus to the Government house. It was early in the morning. But they did not enter the Government house themselves, otherwise they might become defiled, and so be unable to eat the Passover.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Therefore Pilate came outside to speak to them. \uc1\u8216*What charge do you bring against this man?\uc1\u8217* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*If he had not been a criminal, we should not have given him up to you,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Take him yourselves,\uc1\u8217* said Pilate, \uc1\u8216*and try him by your own Law.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We have no power to put anyone to death,\uc1\u8217* the authorities replied \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}in fulfilment of what Jesus had said when indicating the death that he was destined to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}After that, Pilate went into the Government house again, and calling Jesus up, asked him, \uc1\u8216*Are you the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Do you ask me that yourself?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*or did others say it to you about me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Do you take me for a Jew?\uc1\u8217* was Pilate\uc1\u8217*s answer. \uc1\u8216*It is your own nation and the chief priests who have given you up to me. What have you done?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*My kingly power,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is not due to this world. If it had been so, my servants would be doing their utmost to prevent my being given up to the authorities; but my kingly power is not from the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*So you are a king after all!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Pilate. \uc1\u8216*Yes, it is true I am a king,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*I was born for this, I have come into the world for this \uc1\u8211* to bear testimony to the truth. Everyone who is on the side of truth listens to my voice.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*What is truth?\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Pilate. After saying this, he went out to the crowd again, and said, \uc1\u8216*For my part, I find nothing with which he can be charged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}It is, however, the custom for me to grant you the release of one man at the Passover Festival. Do you wish for the release of the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*No, not this man,\uc1\u8217* they shouted again, \uc1\u8216*but Barabbas!\uc1\u8217* This Barabbas was a robber.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}After that, Pilate had Jesus scourged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The soldiers made a crown with some thorns and put it on his head and threw a purple robe round him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They kept coming up to him and saying, \uc1\u8216*Long live the king of the Jews!\uc1\u8217* and they gave him blow after blow with their hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Pilate again came outside, and said to the people, \uc1\u8216*Look! I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find nothing with which he can be charged.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe; and Pilate said to them, \uc1\u8216*Here is the man!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When the chief priests and the guards saw him, they shouted, \uc1\u8216*Crucify him! Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Take him yourselves and crucify him,\uc1\u8217* said Pilate. \uc1\u8216*For my part, I find nothing with which he can be charged.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*But we,\uc1\u8217* replied the crowd, \uc1\u8216*have a Law, under which he deserves death for making himself out to be the Son of God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Pilate heard what they said, he became still more alarmed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and, going into the Government house again, he said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Where do you come from?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Jesus made no reply. So Pilate said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do you refuse to speak to me? Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that I have power to release you, and have power to crucify you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*You would have no power over me at all,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*if it had not been given you from above; and, therefore, the man who betrayed me to you is guilty of the greater sin.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This made Pilate anxious to release him; but the crowd shouted, \uc1\u8216*If you release that man, you are no friend of the Emperor! Anyone who makes himself out to be a king is setting himself against the Emperor!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On hearing what they said, Pilate brought Jesus out, and took his seat on the Bench at a place called \uc1\u8220*The Stone Pavement\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* in Hebrew \uc1\u8220*Gabbatha.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was the Passover Preparation day, and about noon. Then he said to the crowd, \uc1\u8216*Here is your king!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}At that the people shouted, \uc1\u8216*Kill him! Kill him! Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*What! Should I crucify your king?\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Pilate. \uc1\u8216*We have no king but the Emperor,\uc1\u8217* replied the chief priests;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}so Pilate gave Jesus up to them to be crucified.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 So they took Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and he went out, carrying his cross himself, to the place which is named from a skull, or, in Hebrew, Golgotha.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}There they crucified him, and two others with him \uc1\u8211* one on each side, and Jesus between them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Pilate also had these words written and put up over the cross \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These words were read by many people, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and they were written in Hebrew, Latin and Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The chief priests said to Pilate, \uc1\u8216*Do not write \uc1\u8220*The king of the Jews\uc1\u8221*, but write what the man said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I am the king of the Jews.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Pilate answered, \uc1\u8216*What I have written, I have written.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and divided them into four shares \uc1\u8211* a share for each soldier \uc1\u8211* and they took the coat also. The coat had no seam, being woven in one piece from top to bottom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So they said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Do not let us tear it, but let us cast lots for it, to see who will have it.\uc1\u8217* This was in fulfilment of the words of scripture \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*They shared my clothes among them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 and over my clothing they cast lots.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 That was what the soldiers did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile near the cross of Jesus were standing his mother and his mother\uc1\u8217*s sister, as well as Mary the wife of Clopas and Mary of Magdala.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved, standing near, he said to his mother, \uc1\u8216*There is your son.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then he said to that disciple, \uc1\u8216*There is your mother.\uc1\u8217* And from that very hour the disciple took her to live in his house.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Afterwards, knowing that everything was now finished, Jesus said, in fulfilment of the words of scripture, \uc1\u8216*I am thirsty.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}There was a bowl standing there full of common wine; so they put a sponge soaked in the wine on the end of a hyssop-stalk, and held it up to his mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}When Jesus had received the wine, he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*All is finished!\uc1\u8217* Then, bowing his head, he resigned his spirit to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}It was the Preparation day, and so, to prevent the bodies from remaining on the crosses during the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies removed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Accordingly the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man, and then those of the other who had been crucified with Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}but, on coming to him, when they saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}One of the soldiers, however, pierced his side with a spear, and blood and water immediately flowed from it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}This is the statement of one who actually saw it \uc1\u8211* and his statement may be relied on, and he knows that he is speaking the truth \uc1\u8211* and it is given in order that you also may be convinced.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For all this happened in fulfilment of the words of scripture \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Not one of its bones will be broken.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And there is another passage which says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They will look on him whom they pierced.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}After this, Joseph of Arimathea, a disciple of Jesus \uc1\u8211* but a secret one, owing to his fear of the religious authorities \uc1\u8211* begged Pilate\uc1\u8217*s permission to remove the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him leave; so Joseph went and removed the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Nicodemus, too \uc1\u8211* the man who had formerly visited Jesus by night \uc1\u8211* came with a roll of myrrh and aloes, weighing nearly a hundred pounds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}They took the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen with the spices, according to the Jewish mode of burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}At the place where Jesus had been crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a newly made tomb in which no one had ever been laid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}And so, because of its being the Preparation day, and as the tomb was close at hand, they laid Jesus there.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Risen Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}On the first day of the week, early in the morning, while it was still dark, Mary of Magdala went to the tomb, and saw that the stone had been removed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So she came running to Simon Peter, and to that other disciple who was Jesus\uc1\u8217* friend, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*They have taken away the Master out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So, Peter started off with that other disciple, and they went to the tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The two began running together; but the other disciple ran faster than Peter, and reached the tomb first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Stooping down, he saw the linen wrappings lying there, but did not go in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Presently Simon Peter came following behind him, and went into the tomb; and he looked at the linen wrappings lying there,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and the cloth which had been on Jesus\uc1\u8217* head, not lying with the wrappings, but rolled up on one side, separately.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, went inside too, and he saw for himself and was convinced.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For they did not then understand the passage of scripture which says that Jesus must rise again from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The disciples then returned to their companions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Meanwhile Mary was standing close outside the tomb, weeping. Still weeping, she leant forward into the tomb,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and perceived two angels clothed in white sitting there, where the body of Jesus had been lying, one where the head and the other where the feet had been.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Why are you weeping?\uc1\u8217* asked the angels. \uc1\u8216*They have taken my Master away,\uc1\u8217* she answered, \uc1\u8216*and I do not know where they have laid him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}After saying this, she turned round, and looked at Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?\uc1\u8217* he asked. Supposing him to be the gardener, Mary answered, \uc1\u8216*If it was you, Sir, who carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away myself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Mary!\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. She turned round, and exclaimed in Hebrew, \uc1\u8216*Rabboni!\uc1\u8217* (or, as we should say, \uc1\u8220*teacher\uc1\u8221*).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Do not hold me,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers, and tell them that I am ascending to him who is my Father and their Father, my God and their God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Mary of Magdala went and told the disciples that she had seen the Master, and that he had said this to her.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In the evening of the same day \uc1\u8211* the first day of the week \uc1\u8211* after the doors of the room, in which the disciples were, had been shut because they were afraid of the religious authorities, Jesus came and stood among them and said, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}after which he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples were filled with joy when they saw the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Again Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me as his messenger, so I am sending you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After saying this, he breathed on them, and said, \uc1\u8216*Receive the Holy Spirit;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}if you remit anyone\uc1\u8217*s sins, they have been remitted; and, if you retain them, they have been retained.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But Thomas, one of the Twelve, called \uc1\u8220*The Twin,\uc1\u8221* was not with them when Jesus came;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}so the rest of the disciples said to him, \uc1\u8216*We have seen the Master!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Unless I see the marks of the nails in his hands,\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*and put my finger into the marks, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}A week later the disciples were again in the house, and Thomas was with them. After the doors had been shut, Jesus came and stood among them, and said, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then he said to Thomas, \uc1\u8216*Place your finger here, and look at my hands; and place your hand here, and put it into my side; and do not refuse to believe, but believe.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And Thomas exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*My Master, and my God!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Is it because you have seen me that you have believed?\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}There were many other signs of his mission that Jesus gave in presence of the disciples, which are not recorded in this book;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}but these have been recorded so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God \uc1\u8211* and that, through your belief in his name, you may have life.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}Later on, Jesus showed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It was in this way, \uc1\u8211* Simon Peter, Thomas, who was called \uc1\u8220*The Twin,\uc1\u8221* Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s sons, and two other disciples of Jesus, were together, when Simon Peter said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I am going fishing.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We will come with you,\uc1\u8217* said the others. They went out and got into the boat, but caught nothing that night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Just as day was breaking, Jesus came and stood on the beach; but the disciples did not know that it was he.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*My children,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*have you anything to eat?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Cast your net to the right of the boat,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and you will find fish.\uc1\u8217* So they cast the net, and now they could not haul it in because of the quantity of fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*It is the Master!\uc1\u8217* When Simon Peter heard that it was the Master, he fastened his coat round him (for he had taken it off), and threw himself into the sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But the rest of the disciples came in the boat (for they were only about a hundred yards from shore), dragging the net full of fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When they had come ashore, they found a charcoal fire ready, with some fish already on it, and some bread as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Bring some of the fish which you have just caught,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So Simon Peter got into the boat and hauled the net ashore full of large fish, a hundred and fifty-three of them; and yet, although there were so many, the net had not been torn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Come and have breakfast.\uc1\u8217*, Jesus said. None of the disciples dared ask him who he was, because they knew it was the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus went and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish too.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This was the third time that Jesus showed himself to the disciples after he had risen from the dead.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When breakfast was over, Jesus said to Simon Peter, \uc1\u8216*Simon, son of John, do you love me more than the others?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*you know that I am your friend.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Feed my lambs,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then, a second time, Jesus asked, \uc1\u8216*Simon, son of John, do you love me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*you know that I am your friend.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Tend my sheep,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The third time, Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Simon, son of John, are you my friend?\uc1\u8217* Peter was hurt at his third question being \uc1\u8220*Are you my friend?\uc1\u8221*; and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Master, you know everything! You can tell that I am your friend.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Feed my sheep,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he continued, \uc1\u8216*when you were young, you used to put on your own clothes, and walk wherever you wished; but, when you have grown old, you will have to stretch out your hands, while someone else puts on your clothes, and takes you where you do not wish.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus said this to show the death by which Peter was to honour God, and then he added, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Peter turned round, and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following \uc1\u8211* the one who at the supper leant back on the Master\uc1\u8217*s shoulder, and asked him who it was who would betray him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Master, what about this man?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*If it is my will that he should wait until I come,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*what has that to do with you? Follow me yourself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So the report spread among his followers that that disciple was not to die; yet Jesus did not say that he was not to die, but said \uc1\u8216*If it is my will that he should wait until I come, what has that to do with you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}It is this disciple who states these things, and who recorded them; and we know that his statement is true.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}There are many other things which Jesus did; but, if every one of them were to be recorded in detail, I suppose that even the world itself would not hold the books that would be written.
\par}

}