{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Daniel (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 The Book of Daniel

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Nebuchadnezzar\uc1\u8217*s court

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the third year of the reign of King Jehoiakim of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon laid siege to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} handed King Jehoiakim over to him, with some of the vessels of the house of God; and he carried them off to the land of Shinar to the temple of his god, and placed them in the temple treasury.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The king commanded Ashpenaz, the chief of his eunuchs, to bring to him some of the Israelite princes and nobles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They were to be young men who were without physical defect and handsome, comfortable with all types of knowledge, well taught and quick to learn and able to serve in the king\uc1\u8217*s palace. They were to be taught the learning and the language of the Chaldeans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The king gave to them each day some of his rich food and some of the wine which he drank.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He also commanded that they should be taught for three years, and that at the end of that time they should enter the royal service.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6b}Among these young men were: Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, all of whom were from the tribe of Judah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but the chief of the king\uc1\u8217*s eunuchs gave other names to them. To Daniel he gave the name Belteshazzar, and to Hananiah, Shadrach, and to Mishael, Meshach, and to Azariah, Abednego.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But Daniel made up his mind not to become ritually unclean by being contaminated by the rich food of the king nor with the wine which he drank. So he asked the chief of the king\uc1\u8217*s eunuchs to help him avoid it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God helped Daniel to win the kindness and favor of the chief.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But the chief of the eunuchs said to Daniel, \uc1\u8220*I fear that my lord, the king, who has given you your food and your drink, will see that your faces are sadder than those of young men who are your own age, and so you will endanger my head with the king.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So Daniel went to the guardian whom the chief of the eunuchs had put over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, and said{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*Test us for ten days; and let us have vegetables to eat and water to drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then compare the way we look with that of the young men who eat of the king\uc1\u8217*s rich food. Then do to us as seems best.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So he did as they asked and tested them for ten days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}At the end of ten days they looked better and they were healthier than all the young men who ate the king\uc1\u8217*s rich food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So the guardian took away their rich food and the wine and gave them vegetables.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}To these four young men God gave knowledge, learning, and wisdom; and Daniel understood all kinds of visions and dreams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}On the date which the king had fixed for introducing all the young men to the court, the chief of his eunuchs brought them to Nebuchadnezzar,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and the king talked with them. But not one of all the young men was found equal to Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. So they began to serve the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}On every subject which called for wisdom and understanding and about which the king questioned them, he found them ten times better than all the wise men and magicians who were in his entire kingdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Daniel remained at the court until the start of the reign of King Cyrus.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A king\uc1\u8217*s strange dream

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Nebuchadnezzar in the second year of his reign had dreams, and his mind was so troubled that he could not sleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then the king sent for the magicians and the wise men, and the Chaldaens (who studied the stars) to tell him what his dreams meant. So they came in before the king,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and he said to them, \uc1\u8220*I have had a dream and my mind is troubled, for I want to know what the dream means.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then those who studied the stars said to the king in Aramaic: \uc1\u8220*O king, live forever! Tell the dream to your servants and we will tell you what it means.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The king answered, \uc1\u8220*What I now say is certain: if you do not tell me the dream and what it means, you will be torn limb from limb and your houses will be maderuins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But if you tell the dream and what it means, you will receive from me gifts and rewards and great honors; therefore tell me the dream and what it means.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They answered the second time, \uc1\u8220*Let the king tell the dream to his servants, and we will tell what it means.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The king replied, \uc1\u8220*I see clearly that you wish to gain time, for you know that what I have said is certain,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and that if you do not tell the dream to me, you will all suffer the same punishment. So you have planned to speak lying and false words before me, until the time when it is to happen has passed. Therefore tell me the dream, and I will know that you can tell me what it means.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The Chaldeans answered the king, \uc1\u8220*There is no man on earth who can do what the king asks, for no king, however great and powerful, has ever asked such a thing of any wise man or magician, or of one who studies the stars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}What the king asks is too hard. There is no one else who can tell it to the king, except the gods, who do not live among mortals.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This made the king very angry and he ordered all the wise men of Babylon put to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So the command was given that the wise men were to be put to death. Search was made for Daniel and his friends that they too might be put to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Daniel approached Arioch, the captain of the king\uc1\u8217*s guard, who had gone out to put the wise men of Babylon to death, and quietly and carefully asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*Why is the king\uc1\u8217*s command so harsh?\uc1\u8221* When Arioch told Daniel the facts,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}he went to the king and asked that he give him time to tell what the dream meant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Daniel went to his house and told the facts to his friends, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, so that they might beg the God of heaven to be kind to them and to tell Daniel this secret, so that they might not die with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then the secret was told to Daniel in a vision at night, and he praised the God of heaven and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*Blessed be the name of God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
from everlasting to everlasting!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For wisdom and power are his.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He controls the seasons and times,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he removes and installs kings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He gives wisdom to the wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and knowledge to those who have insight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He shows the deep, secret things;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he knows what is in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the light of truth dwells in him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}God of my fathers:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I give you thanks and praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For you gave me wisdom and strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and havemade known the things we asked;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
You have made known to us the king\uc1\u8217*s secret!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then Daniel went to Arioch, whom the king had commanded to kill the wise men of Babylon, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Do not kill the wise men of Babylon. Take me to the king, and I will tell him what his dream means.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Arioch quickly brought Daniel to the king and said to him, \uc1\u8220*I have found a man among the captives from Judah who will tell you what this dream means.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The king said to Daniel (whose name was Belteshazzar), \uc1\u8220*Can you make known to me the dream which I have had and what it means?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Daniel answered, \uc1\u8220*The secret which the king asks is something that neither wise men, magicians, nor those who study the stars can make known to him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}but there is a God in heaven who tells secrets, and he has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar what will come in the future. Your dream and the visions which you had as you lay asleep are these:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*The thoughts which came into your mind on your bed concerned what will happen in the future. The one who reveals secrets has made known to you what will come to pass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}This secret was not revealed to me because I am wiser than other living people, but so that the king might learn the interpretation: so that you might understand the thoughts that have come to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*You, O king, had a vision and saw a great image. That image was large and it was exceedingly bright as it stood before you, and its appearance was terrifying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The head of the image was of fine gold, its breast and its arms of silver, its body and its thighs of bronze,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}its legs of iron, its feet part of iron and part of clay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}You looked at it until a stone was cut out, not by human hands, which struck the image on its feet of iron and clay and broke them in pieces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold were all broken in pieces and became like the chaff which blows from the summer threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away so that nothing was left of them. But the stone that struck the image became a great mountain and filled the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8220*This is the dream, and we will tell the king what it means:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}O king, you are the king of kings to whom the God of heaven has given the rule, the power, the strength, and the glory.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Over the whole world he has given into your power, people, the wild beasts and the birds, and has made you rule over them all. You are the head of gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8220*After you will rise another kingdom not so strong as you are, and a third kingdom of bronze, which will rule over the whole earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}A fourth kingdom will be strong as iron, for iron breaks in pieces and shatters all things, and like iron which crushes, it will break in pieces and crush all things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}As you saw the feet and toes, part clay and part iron, it will be a divided kingdom; but there will be in it some of the strength of the iron, for you saw the iron mixed with clay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}As the toes of the feet were part iron and part clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly broken.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}You saw the iron mixed with clay, for the ruling families will arrange marriage alliances between each other, but they will not stick together, just as iron does not stick to clay.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8220*During the reigns of these kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom which will never be destroyed, nor will the power be left to another people; but it will break in pieces and destroy all these kingdoms, and it will stand forever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}This is shown by the fact that you saw a stone cut out of the mountain, but not with human hand. It broke in pieces the iron, the bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*The great God has made known to the king what is to come, and the dream is real and this meaning true.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel, and ordered that a sacrifice and sweet odors should be offered to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The king also said to Daniel, \uc1\u8220*Your God is the God of gods and the Lord of kings, and one who tells his secrets to his servant, for you have been able to tell this great secret.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Then the king gave Daniel a high position and many costly gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon and chief over all the wise men in Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}But at Daniel\uc1\u8217*s request the king placed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in charge of the province of Babylon; while Daniel stayed in the king\uc1\u8217*s court.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The test by fire

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Nebuchadnezzar, the king, made a statue of gold ninety feet high and nine feet wide. He set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then he sent for the officers, the governors, the judges, the treasurers, and all the rulers of the provinces to attend the dedication of the statue he had set up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So the officers, the governors, the judges, the treasurers, and all the rulers of the provinces all came together for the dedication and stood before the statue that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the herald cried aloud, \uc1\u8220*To you it is commanded, peoples, nations:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The moment you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, drum, and entire musical ensemble, you must fall down and worship the golden statue which King Nebuchadnezzar has set up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Whoever does not fall down and worship will be thrown into a burning, fiery furnace.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So when all the people heard the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, drum, and entire musical ensemble, all the peoples, nations, and the speakers of all languages fell down and worshipped the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But at that time certain Chaldeans came near to the king and made this accusation against the Jews:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*O king, live forever! O king, you have commanded that every man who hears the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, drum, and entire musical ensemble must fall down and worship the golden statue,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and that whoever does not fall down and worship will be thrown into a burning, fiery furnace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}There are certain Jews, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, whom you have placed in charge of the province of Babylon. These men, O king, have not obeyed your command; they do not serve your gods nor worship the golden statue which you have set up.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury gave command to bring in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When they were brought before the king, Nebuchadnezzar said to them, \uc1\u8220*Is it true, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you do not serve my god nor worship the golden statue which I have set up?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If you are now ready, as soon as you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, drum, and entire musical ensemble, to fall down and worship the statue which I have made, well and good; but if you do not worship, you will at once be thrown into a burning, fiery furnace. Where is there a god who can deliver you out of my hands?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego replied, \uc1\u8220*O king, there is no need of our answering you about this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Our God whom we serve is able to save us from the burning, fiery furnace; he will save us out of your hand, O king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But if not, know, O king, that we will not serve your gods nor worship the golden image which you have set up.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then Nebuchadnezzar was very angry and the appearance of his face changed, as he looked at Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He ordered that the furnace should be heated seven times hotter than usual.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He also commanded certain strong men who were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and throw them into the burning, fiery furnace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then these men were bound in their cloaks, their tunics, their robes, and their other garments, and were thrown into the burning, fiery furnace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As the king\uc1\u8217*s command was urgent and the furnace very hot, the flames destroyed the men who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down, bound, into the midst of the burning, fiery furnace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Nebuchadnezzar, the king, was so astonished that he rose up hastily and said to his counsellors, \uc1\u8220*Did we not throw three men, bound, into the fire?\uc1\u8221* They answered, \uc1\u8220*True, O king.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He said, \uc1\u8220*Now I see four men, unbound, walking in the midst of the fire, and they are unhurt, and the fourth looks like a god.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then Nebuchadnezzar went near the door of the burning, fiery furnace and said, \uc1\u8220*Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the Most High God, come out.\uc1\u8221* Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of the fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The officers, governors, and counsellors who were there saw that the fire had no power over the bodies of these men, and that the hair of their heads was not singed and that their cloaks were not harmed, and that there was no smell of fire. And{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Nebuchadnezzar said, \uc1\u8220*Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his angel to save his servants who trusted in him and refused to obey the king\uc1\u8217*s command and have offered their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god except their own.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Therefore I command that every people, nation, and speaker of every language that says anything against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego will be cut in pieces and their house will be made a ruin, for there is no other god who is so able to save as is this one.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then the king gave high positions, in the province of Babylon, to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The king\uc1\u8217*s madness

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Nebuchadnezzar the king to all peoples, nations, and languages that live throughout the earth: May your peace be great.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It has seemed good to me to show the signs and wonders that the Most High God worked for me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}How great are his signs! And how mighty are his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his rule lasts from generation to generation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my house, and prosperous in my palace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I saw a dream that made me afraid; and the thoughts on my bed and the visions of my head troubled me. Therefore I made a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me, so that they might make known to me the interpretation of the dream.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then the magicians, the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the astrologers came in, and I told the dream to them; but they did not make known to me its interpretation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But at last there came before me Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and I told the dream to him:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*Belteshazzar, chief of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you, and no secret troubles you, tell me the secret visions of my dream that I have seen, and its interpretation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}These were the visions of my head on my bed: I saw a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height was great.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The tree grew and was strong, and its height reached to heaven, and it could be seen to the end of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Its leaves were fair, and its fruit abundant, and in it was food for all; the animals of the field found shade under it, and the birds of the heavens nested in its branches, and every kind of living being was fed from it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I saw in the visions of my head on my bed a watcher, a holy one, came down from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He cried aloud, \uc1\u8216*Hew down the tree, and cut off its branches, shake off its leaves, and scatter its fruit; let the animals get away from under it, and the birds from its branches.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But leave the stump of its roots in the earth, with a band of iron and bronze; bound with iron and bronze he will be fed with the grass of the field, and wet with the dew of heaven, and his portion will be with the animals.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}His mind will be changed so that it will not be that of a man, and an animals\uc1\u8217*s mind will be given to him, and seven times will pass over him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The sentence is by the decree of the watchers, and the affair by the word of the holy ones, that the living may know that the Most High rules over human kingdoms of gives them to whoever he will, and can set up as ruler the humblest of people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, have seen; and you, O Belteshazzar, must declare the interpretation, since all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known to me the interpretation; but you are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was dumfounded for a moment, and his thoughts troubled him. The king said, \uc1\u8220*Belteshazzar, let not the dream or the interpretation trouble you.\uc1\u8221* Belteshazzar answered, \uc1\u8220*My lord, I wish the dream applied to those who hate you, and its interpretation to your adversaries!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The tree which you saw, which grew and was strong, whose height reached to heaven, and the sight of it to all the earth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}whose leaves were fair, and whose fruit abundant, and in which was food for all; under which the animals sheltered, and upon whose branches the birds of the heavens had their nests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}is you, O king \uc1\u8211* you who are great and strong; and your greatness has grown, and reaches to heaven, and your dominion to the end of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}You saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven, and saying. Hew down the tree and destroy it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}This is the interpretation, O king, and it is the decree of the Most High, which has come upon my lord the king:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}You will be driven from people, and your dwelling will be with the animals of the field, and you will be made to eat grass as oxen, and will be wet with the dew of heaven, and seven times will pass over you; until you know that the Most High rules in human kingdoms and gives them to whomever he will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And as they commanded to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, so your kingdom will be secure to you as soon as you recognize that the heavens do rule.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you, and break off your sins by righteous works, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; then perhaps there may be a continuation of your prosperity.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}All this happened to King Nebuchadnezzar:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At the end of twelve months he was walking in the royal palace of Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The king said, \uc1\u8220*Is not this great Babylon which I have built for a residence, by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}While the word was in the king\uc1\u8217*s mouth, a voice came down from heaven: \uc1\u8220*King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is spoken: The kingdom has passed away from you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and you will be driven from people, and your home will be with the animals of the field; you will be made to eat grass as oxen; and seven times will pass over you, until you know that the Most High rules in human kingdoms and gives them to whom he will.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The same hour the word was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar; and he was driven from people, and ate grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, until his hair had grown like eagles\uc1\u8217* feathers and his nails like birds\uc1\u8217* claws.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}At the end of the appointed time I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up my eyes to heaven, and my reason returned to me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised and honored him who lives forever; for his dominion is an everlasting dominion and his kingdom lasts generation to generation;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and all the inhabitants of the earth are considered as nothing; and he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and no oone can stay his hand, or say to him. What are you doing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}At that same time my reason returned to me, and for the sake of my royal honor, my majesty and my kingly appearance were restored to me. Then my counsellors and my nobles sought eagerly for me; and I was established in my kingdom, and still greater power was added to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven, for all his works are truth, and his ways justice; and those who walk in pride he is able to humble.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The handwriting on the wall

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Belshazzar, the king, made a great feast for a thousand of his nobles and drank wine before them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Under the influence of wine, he gave command to bring the gold and silver utensils which his father, Nebuchadnezzar, had taken from the temple at Jerusalem, so that the king, his nobles, his wives, and concubines might drink from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So they brought the golden vessels which were taken from the temple of God which was at Jerusalem. The king, his nobles, his wives, and concubines drank from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They drank wine and praised the gods of gold, of silver, of bronze, of iron, of wood, and of stone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}At that moment the fingers of a human hand appeared and wrote opposite the lamp on the plaster of the wall of the king\uc1\u8217*s palace; and the king saw the palm of the hand that wrote.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then the king grew pale, and fear filled his mind, his legs trembled and his knees knocked together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He called for the magicians and the Chaldeans (who study the stars) and said to the wise men of Babylon, \uc1\u8220*Whoever reads this writing and tells me what it means will be clothed in purple and have a chain of gold about his neck and will be the third ruler in the kingdom.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then all the king\uc1\u8217*s wise men came in, but they could not read the writing nor tell the king what it meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So King Belshazzar was greatly troubled, and his face grew pale, and his nobles were thrown into confusion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now the queen, because of what the king and his nobles had said, came into the banquet-house and said, \uc1\u8220*O king, live forever; let not your thoughts trouble you nor let yourself grow pale.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}There is a man in your kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods, and in the days of your father he was found to have light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods. King Nebuchadnezzar, your father, put him in charge of all the magicians, Chaldeans and those who study the stars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}for an excellent spirit and knowledge and understanding, the interpreting of dreams and explaining of riddles and the solving of difficulties were found in this same Daniel, whose name the king changed to Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will tell what it means.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So Daniel was brought in before the king, and the king said to him, \uc1\u8220*Are you that Daniel, one of the men who were carried away captive, whom the king, my father, brought from Judah?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I have heard that the spirit of the gods is in you, and that you have understanding and great wisdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The wise men and the magicians have been brought in before me to read this writing and to tell what it means; but they are not able.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I have heard that you can tell what dreams mean and answer hard questions. Now if you can read the writing and tell what it means, you will be clothed with purple and have a chain of gold about your neck and will be the third ruler in the kingdom.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Daniel answered the king, \uc1\u8220*Keep your gifts and give your rewards to another. Without them I will read the writing to the king, and tell what it means.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}O king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar, your father, the kingdom and power, glory and majesty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Because of the power that he gave him, all peoples, nations, and races trembled and feared him. He killed or kept alive as he wished; and he raised up or put down whom he pleased.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But when he became proud and haughty, he was made to come down from his kingly throne and his glory was taken from him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and he was driven away from men, and his mind became like that of the beasts, and he lived with the wild asses; he was fed with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, until he learned that the Most High God rules over the realm of humanity and that he sets up over it whom he will.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8220*But you, his son Belshazzar, have not been humble, though you knew all this,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}but you have raised yourself against the Lord of heaven, and have had the utensils of his temple brought before you, and you, your nobles, your wives, and the others of your household have drunk wine from them. You have given praise to the gods of silver, of gold, of bronze, of iron, of wood, and of stone, which cannot see nor hear nor know; and you have not praised the God in whose control are your very breath and all that you do.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Then the hand was sent out before him and traced this writing:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*This is what it means: Mene: God has numbered the days your kingdom and brought it to an end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Tekel: you are weighed in the scales and found wanting.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Upharsin: your kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then at Belshazzar\uc1\u8217*s command Daniel was clothed with purple and a chain of gold was put about his neck, and he was proclaimed the third ruler in the kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But on that very night Belshazzar, the Chaldean king, was killed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and Darius, the Mede, who was sixty-two years old, received the kingdom.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Daniel in the lions\uc1\u8217* den

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom a hundred and twenty officers who ruled the whole kingdom,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and over them three chief officials, of whom Daniel was one, so that these officers might report to them and that the king should lose nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Daniel was better than the other chief officials and the officers, for he had a fine spirit; and the king intended to set him over the whole empire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the chief officials and the officers tried to find a way to accuse Daniel of not having done his duty, but they could not find anything against him, for he was faithful and was not guilty of any mistake or wrongdoing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then these men said, \uc1\u8220*We will not find any way to accuse this Daniel unless we find it in connection with the law of his God.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So these chief officials and officers all went to the king, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*King Darius, live forever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All the chief officials of the kingdom, the counsellors and the officers, the judges and the governors, have consulted together to have the king make a law and give a strong command that whoever will ask a petition of any god or person for thirty days, except of you, O king, will be thrown into a den of lions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now, O king, give the command and sign the law that, like the law of the Medes and Persians, it may not be changed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So King Darius signed the law and the command.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When Daniel learnt that the law was signed, he went into his house. His windows were open in his room toward Jerusalem, and he knelt upon his knees three times a day and prayed, and gave thanks to his God as he had done before.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then these men rushed in and found Daniel praying and calling upon his God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So they went before the king and spoke to him about the royal command: \uc1\u8220*Have you not signed a command, that everyone who asks a petition of any person or god within thirty days, except of you, O king, will be thrown into the den of lions?\uc1\u8221* The king answered, \uc1\u8220*The rule is fixed according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be changed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then they went on to say to the king, \uc1\u8220*Daniel, who is one of the captives from Judah, pays no attention to you, O king, nor to the command that you have signed, but prays three times a day.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When the king heard these words, he was greatly displeased, and set his heart on saving Daniel, and he worked until the sun set to save him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then these men all went to the king and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians, that no command nor law which the king gives may be changed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So the king gave his command, and they brought Daniel and threw him into the den of lions. But the king said to Daniel, \uc1\u8220*Your God, whom you always serve, will save you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then a stone was brought and laid at the entrance to the den; and the king sealed it with his own seal-ring and with those of his nobles, that no change might be made so as to rescue Daniel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then the king went to his palace and passed the night fastingalone; he could not sleep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}At dawn, as soon as it was light, the king rose and hurried to the den of lions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When he came near to the den where Daniel was, he called anxiously, \uc1\u8220*Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you always serve, been able to save you from the lions?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Daniel said to the king, \uc1\u8220*O king, live forever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}My God has sent his angel and has closed the lions\uc1\u8217* mouths, and they have not hurt me, for I was innocent before him; and also before you, O king, I have done no wrong.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then the king was very glad and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and it was found that he was not injured, for he had trusted in his God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then the king commanded that those men who had accused Daniel should be brought and thrown into the den of lions, with their wives and children. Before they reached the floor of the den, the lions pounced on them and tore them to pieces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}King Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations, and races in all his kingdom, \uc1\u8220*May your peace be great!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I make a law that throughout all my kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; for he is the living God, and is the same forever, and his kingdom is one that will not be destroyed; and his rule will be without end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He saves and rescues, and does wonderful things in heaven and earth; it is he who has saved Daniel from the power of the lions.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So Daniel was successful and happy during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of the great beasts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a dream and visions as he lay on his bed. Then he wrote down the dream:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*I saw in my vision by night the four winds of heaven broke forth upon the great sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Four great beasts came up from the sea, each different from the other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The first was like a lion and had eagle\uc1\u8217*s wings. I looked until its wings were stripped off, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made to stand upon two feet as a person; and a human heart was given to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And I saw a second beast, like a bear; and it was raised up on one side, and three ribs were in its mouth, between its teeth; and they said to it: \uc1\u8216*Arise, devour much flesh.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After this I saw another like a leopard, which had upon its sides four wings of a bird; and the beast had also four heads, and dominion was given to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After this I saw in the night-visions a fourth beast, terrible and fearful, and exceedingly strong; and it had great iron teeth; it devoured and broke in pieces and stamped the rest with its feet; and it differed from all the beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}While I considered the horns, another little horn came up among them, before which three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots; in this horn were eyes, like human eyes, and a mouth speaking arrogrant things.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*I waited until thrones were set up, and an aged one took his seat; his clothing was white as snow, and his hair like spotless wool, his throne was fiery flames, its wheels burning fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}A fiery stream issued and came forth before him: thousands of thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the judgment was set and the books were opened.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*I looked at that time because of the sound of the arrogant words which the horn spoke \uc1\u8211* I looked even until the beast was slain, and its body destroyed, and given to be fuel for the fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Also the rule of the rest of the beasts was taken away; but their lives were prolonged for a fixed time and season.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*I saw in the night-visions that there came with the clouds of heaven one like a human being, and he came even to the Aged One, and was brought near before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}There was given him dominion and glory, and sovereignty, that all the peoples, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion which will not pass away, and his sovereignty one which will not be destroyed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}As for me, Daniel, my spirit was grieved by reason of this, and the visions of my head troubled me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I came near to one of those who stood by, and asked him the truth concerning all this. So he told me the interpretation of the things:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*These four great beasts are four kings who will arise out of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But the holy ones of the Most High will receive the sovereignty, and possess the sovereignty for ever, for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was different from all of them, exceedingly terrible, whose teeth were of iron, and its nails of bronze; which devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped the rest with its feet:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and concerning the ten horns that were on its head, and the other horn which came up, and before which three horns fell \uc1\u8211* it that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke arrogant things, and it appeared to be greater than the rest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I looked, and the same horn made war with the holy ones, and prevailed against them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}until the Aged One came, and judgment was given to the holy one of the Most High, and the fixed time came that the holy ones possessed the sovereignty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Thus he said: \uc1\u8220*The fourth beast will be a fourth kingdom upon earth, which will be different from all the kingdoms; and will devour the whole earth, and will tread it down, and break it in pieces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}As for the ten horns, out of this kingdom ten kings will arise; and another will arise after them; and he will be different from the former, and he will put down three kings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He will speak words against the Most High, and will continually harass the holy ones of the Most High; and he will think to change the fixed times and the law; and they will be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But the judgment will be set, and they will take away his kingdom, to consume and to destroy finally.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The sovereignty, and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, will surely be given to the holy people of the Most High; his sovereignty is an everlasting sovereignty, and all dominions will serve and obey him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Here is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts troubled me much, and I turned pale, but I kept the matter in my mind.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of the ram and goat

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}In the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar a vision came to me, Daniel, after that which appeared to me previously.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I saw in a vision \uc1\u8211* and when I saw, I was in the Shushan, the royal palace, which is in the province of Elam \uc1\u8211* and I saw in a vision, and I was by the River Ulai.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then I looked up and saw standing before the river a ram which had two horns, and the two horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I saw the ram pushing westward and northward and southward, and no beast could stand before him, and none could escape, but he did as he pleased and exulted himself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As I was observing, a he-goat came from the west over the face of the whole earth, without touching the ground; and the goat had a conspicuous horn between his eyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He came to the ram that had two horns, which I saw standing before the river, and ran upon him in the fury of his power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I saw him come close to the ram, and he was angered against him, and stuck the ram, and broke his two horns; and the ram had no strength to stand before him, but he threw him down to the ground and trampled upon him, and none could rescue the ram from him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The he-goat exulted himself exceedingly; and when he had become strong, the great horn was broken. In its place there came up four other horns toward the four winds of heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Out of one of them came another little horn, which grew exceedingly great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the glorious land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It grew great, even to the host of heaven; and some of the host, and of the stars it cast down to the ground and trampled upon them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}It exulted itself even to the prince of the host, and took away from him the daily sacrifice, and threw down the place of his sanctuary,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and it set up the sacrilegious tithing over the daily sacrifice, and threw down truth to the ground, and did it and prospered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then I heard a holy one speaking; and another holy one said to the one who spoke, \uc1\u8220*For how long will the vision be that the daily sacrifice will be taken away and the appalling sacrilege set up and the sanctuary and the host trampled under foot?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He answered, \uc1\u8220*For two thousand and three hundred evenings and mornings. Then will the sanctuary be justified.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When I, Daniel, had seen the vision, I sought to understand it; and suddenly there stood before me one who had the appearance of a man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I heard a human voice between the banks of the Ulai, which called and said, \uc1\u8220*Gabriel, cause this man to understand the vision.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So he came near where I stood; and when he came I was afraid and fell upon my face, but he said to me, \uc1\u8220*Understand, mortal, for the vision belongs to the time of the end.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now as he was speaking with me, I fell into a deep trance with my face toward the ground; but he touched me, and set me upright in my place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He said, \uc1\u8220*I will make you know what will be in the time of wrath, for it belongs to the appointed time of the end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The ram which you saw, with the two horns, represents the kings of Media and Persia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The he-goat is the king of Greece, and the great horn between his eyes is the first king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As for that which was broken so that four stood up in its place, four kingdoms will arise out of his nation, but not with his power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}In the later days of their rule, when the transgressors have come to the full, a king defiant and skilled in dissimulation will stand up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}His power will be mighty, but not by his own power; and he will utter monstrous things, and will achieve, and will destroy the mighty ones.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}His cleverness will be directed against the holy people; he will succeed through deceit, and devise great things, and he will destroy many unawares; he will also stand up against the prince of princes; but he will be destroyed, but not by human hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The vision of the evenings and mornings which has been told is true; but hide the vision for it belongs to many days to come.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}I, Daniel, fainted, and was sick for days; then I rose up and did the king\uc1\u8217*s business and I wondered at the vision, but no one understood it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of the seventy weeks

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, by birth a Mede, who was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, perceived by the books the number of years concerning which the word of the {\scaps Lord} came to Jeremiah the prophet, that they should be completed while Jerusalem stood in ruins \uc1\u8211* namely seventy years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I turned my face to the Lord God, to apply myself to prayer and supplication, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I prayed to the {\scaps Lord} my God, and made confession, and said, \uc1\u8220*Oh, Lord, the great and the terrible God, who keeps the covenant and shows mercy to those who serve him and keep his commands,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}we have sinned and have dealt perversely, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even turning aside from your precepts and from your ordinances;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}neither have we listened to your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Lord, righteousness belongs to you, but shame belongs, as at this day, to the people of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel who are near, and those who are afar off, in the lands where you have driven them, because of their crimes which they have committed against you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Lord, to us belongs shame, to our kings, to our princes, and to our ancestors, because we have sinned against you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}To the Lord our God belongs compassion and forgiveness, for we have rebelled against him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}neither have we obeyed the voice of the {\scaps Lord} our God, to walk in his teachings which he set before us by his servants the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}All Israel have transgressed your law and have turned so as not to obey your voice. Therefore the curse has been poured out upon us, and the oath which is written in the law of Moses, the servant of God; for we have sinned against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He has confirmed his words, which he spoke against us and against our rulers who ruled us, by bringing upon us a great misfortune; for under the whole heaven nothing has ever been done as has been done to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil has come upon us; yet we have not entreated the favour of the {\scaps Lord} our God, that we should turn from our iniquities, and discern your faithfulness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore the {\scaps Lord} has watched over the evil and brought it upon us, for the {\scaps Lord} our God is righteous in all his works which he does, and we have not obeyed his voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*Now, O Lord our God, who brought your people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and have gained renown as at this day, we have sinned and we have done wickedly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}O Lord, according to all your righteousness, let your anger and your wrath, I beg you, be turned away from your city, Jerusalem, your holy mountain; because for our sins and for the iniquities of our ancestors, Jerusalem and your people have become an object of reproach to all who are round about us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Listen, our God to the prayer of your servant, and to his supplications, and show favor to your sanctuary, which is desolate, for the sake of your servants, O Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}O my God, incline your ear, and hear; open your eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which bears your name; for we do not present our supplications before you because of our righteousness, but because of your great compassion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive! O Lord, listen and perform; defer not, for your own sake, O my God, because your city and your people are called by your name.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}While I was speaking, and praying, and confessing, my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the {\scaps Lord} my God for the holy mountain of my God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}while I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen earlier in the vision, being made to fly swiftly, approached me about the time of the evening offering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He came, and talked with me, and said, \uc1\u8220* Daniel, I have now come forth to give you wisdom and insight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At the beginning of your supplications the command went forth, and I have come to tell you; for you are greatly beloved; therefore heed the word, and understand the vision.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Seventy weeks have been decreed upon your people and upon your holy city, to make an end of the sacrilege, and to complete the sin, and to make atonement for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Know therefore and discern, that from the going forth of the command to repeople and rebuild Jerusalem to the anointed one, the prince, will be seven weeks; sixty-two weeks will it be rebuilt, with broad places and streets. At the end of times{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}(even after the sixty-two weeks) an anointed one will be cut off without judicial trial; and the city and the sanctuary will be destroyed together, and his end will come with a flood and even to the end there will be war, a sentence of desolations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The covenant will be annulled for many for one week; and in the midst of the week the sacrifice and the offering will cease, and in its place will be an appalling abomination and that until the ruin determined upon, is poured out upon the appalling thing.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of the kings of north and south

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a a revelation came to Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the word was true, and it means great distress. He gave heed to the words, and understood the vision:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three whole weeks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I ate no pleasant bread, neither did any meat or wine enter my mouth, nor did I anoint myself at all, until three whole weeks were past.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I looked up, and there was a man clothed in linen, with a belt of pure gold of Ophir;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}his body also was like the chrysolith, and his face like lightning, and his eyes like flaming torches, and his arms and his feet like polished bronze, and the sound of his words like the sound of a multitude.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I, Daniel, alone saw the vision; for the men who were with me did not see the vision, but a great trembling seized them, and they fled to hide themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So I was left alone and saw this great vision, and no strength was left in me, for my fresh appearance was changed to pallor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Yet when I heard the sound of his words, I fell into a deep trance with my face toward the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*Suddenly, a hand touched me, which set me trembling upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He said to me, \uc1\u8216*Daniel, greatly beloved, give heed to the words that I speak to you, and stand upright, for to you have I now been sent.\uc1\u8217* When he had spoken this word to me, I stood trembling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then he said to me, \uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid, Daniel, for from the first day that you set your heart to gain insight, and to humble yourself before your God, your words were heard; and I have come because of your words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty-one days; but Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I left him there with the prince of the kings of Persia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now I have come to make you understand what will befall your people in the latter days; for the vision is yet for many days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When he had said these words to me, I turned my face toward the ground, and was dumb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then one who looked human touched my lips; then I opened my mouth, and spoke, and said to him who stood before me, \uc1\u8216*My Lord, because of the vision my pangs have come upon me, and I retain no strength,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for how can this the servant of my Lord talk with my Lord? For as for me, henceforth there remains no strength in me, nor is there breath left in me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*Then another in appearance like a person touched me, and strengthened me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He said, \uc1\u8216*Greatly beloved, fear not; peace be to you; be strong, be bold.\uc1\u8217* When he spoke to me I was strengthened, and said, \uc1\u8216*Let my Lord speak; for you have strengthened me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then he said, \uc1\u8216*Do you know why I have come to you? Now I will return to fight with the prince of Persia, and when I go forth, then the prince of Greece will come;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and none who help me against these, except Michael, your prince, stand as my helper and defence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*But now I will tell you what is written in the book of truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Three more kings will stand up for Persia; and the fourth will be far richer than them all; and when he has grown strong through his riches, he will stir up all against the realm of Greece.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then a warrior king will stand up, who will rule with great dominion and do according to his will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When he has become strong, his kingdom will be broken, and will be divided to the four winds of heaven, but it will not belong to his posterity, nor will it be as great as his dominion, which he ruled, for his kingdom will be overthrown and will belong to others besides these.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*The king of the south will be strong, but one of his princes will be stronger than he, and will rule; his dominion will be great.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}At the end of some years they will make an alliance with one another, and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north to make an agreement, but that support will not retain strength, neither will his supports stand; but she will be given up, and they who brought her, and her child, and he who supported her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*But in those times a shoot out of her roots will arise in his place, who will come to the army, and will enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and will act against them and prevail,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and also will carry away their gods, together with their molten images and their costly things of silver and gold, captive into Egypt; and he will refrain some years from the king of the north.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then another will come into the realm of the king of the south, but he will return to his own land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}His son will war, and will assemble a multitude of great forces, and he will come onward, and overflow, and pass through, and will return and war, even to his fortress.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The king of the south will be enraged, and the will come forth and fight with him. even with the king of the north, and that one will raise a great multitude, but the multitude will be delivered into his hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The multitude will be carried away, and his heart will be exalted; and he will cast down tens of thousands, but he will not show himself strong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*The king of the north will return, and will raise a multitude greater than the former; and he will come after a period of several years, with a great army and with much equipment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In those times many will stand up against the king of the south, also the sons of the violent among your people will lift themselves up to establish the vision, but they will be overthrown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*So the king of the north will come, and cast up a mound, and take a well-fortified city; and the forces of the south will not stand, nor his chosen men, and there will be no strength to stand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But he who will come against him, will do as he desires, and none will withstand him; and he will stand in the glorious land, and in his hand will be destruction.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He will set his face to come with the strength of his whole kingdom, but he will make an agreement with him; and he will perform them; and he will give him the daughter of women, to ruin it; but it will not avail nor will he attain it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}After this he will turn his face to the coast-lands, and he will take many; but a consul will put an end to the insults offered by him; and will repay his insults sevenfold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then he will turn his face toward the fortresses of his own land; but he will stumble and fall and will no longer be found.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*Then one will stand up in his place who will cause an exactor to pass through the glory of the kingdom; but within a few days he will be broken, but not in anger nor in battle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}In his place there will stand up a contemptible person upon whom they had not conferred the royal honor; but he will come unexpectedly, and will obtain the kingdom by intrigues.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Forces will be utterly overwhelmed before him and will be broken, and also a prince of the covenant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After they make a league with him he will act deceitfully; for he will rise and become strong, with a small nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}He will come unperceived, even into the fattest parts of a province; and he will do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers\uc1\u8217* fathers; he will scatter among them prey and spoil and riches, and he will devise plans against the strongholds, even for a time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He will arouse his might and his courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south will make war with an exceedingly great army; but he will not stand, for they will devise plans against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Those who eat his dainties will ruin him, and his army will be swept away as a flood, and many will fall down slain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}As for these kings, their hearts will be bent on mischief, and they will speak lies at one table; but it will not prosper, for yet the end will be at the time appointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*Then will he return to his land with great riches, and his heart will be against the holy covenant; and he will do his pleasure, and return to his own land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At the time appointed he will return, and enter into the south; but it will not be in the latter time as in the former;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}for ships of Kittim will come against him; therefore he will be cowed, and will return, and vent his rage on the holy covenant, and will do his pleasure. He will return and fix his attention on those who forsake the holy covenant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Forces sent by him will prevail, and they will profane the sanctuary, the fortress, and will take away the daily offering and set up the appalling abomination.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He will pervert by specious promises, those who bring guilt upon the covenant; but the people who know their God will be valiant and do exploits.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*They who are wise among the people will give understanding to many; yet they will fall by the sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Now when they are falling, they will be helped with a little help; but many will join themselves to them with false protestations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Some of those who are wise will fall, in order to refine them and cleanse them and make them white, until the time of the end, for it is yet for the time appointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*The king will do according to his will; and he will exalt and magnify himself above every god, and will speak marvellous things against the God of gods; and he will prosper until God\uc1\u8217*s wrath be exhausted; for that which is decreed will be done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Neither will he regard the gods of his fathers; nor the desire of women, nor regard any god, for he will magnify himself above all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But in his place will he honor a god of fortresses; and a god whom his fathers knew not will he honor with gold and silver, with precious stones and costly things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}He will procure for the strong fortresses the people of a foreign god. Whomsoever he regards with favor he will raise to great honor, and he will make them to rule over many, and he will divide the land for a price.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*At the time of the end the king of the south will contend with him; and the king of the north will come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, with horsemen, and with many ships; and he will enter into the countries, and he will overflow them and pass through.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}He will enter also into the glorious land, and many thousands will fall; but these will be delivered out of his hand: Edom, and Moab, and the remnant of the Ammonites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}He will stretch forth his hand also upon the countries, and the land of Egypt will not escape.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}He will have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt; and the Libyans and Ethiopians will follow in his train.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}But rumors out of the east and north will trouble him; and he will go forth with great fury to destroy and to utterly exterminate many.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}He will plant his palace between the Mediterranean and the glorious holy mountain; so he will come to his end, and none will help him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*At that time Michael will stand up, the great prince who stands for the children of my people; and there will be a time of affliction such as there never was since there was a nation, even to that time; and at that time your people will be delivered, every one who will be found written in the loyal book.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They who are wise will shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they who turn many to righteousness as the stars forever and ever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But thou, Daniel, shut up the words and seal the book, to the time of the end; many will run to and fro and knowledge will be increased.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Then I, Daniel, looked, and behold, two others were standing, the one on the brink of the river on this side, and the other on the brink of the river on the other side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}One said to the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, \uc1\u8216*How long will it be to the end of these marvels?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, and he lifted up his right and his left hand to heaven, and swore by him who lives forever: \uc1\u8216*It will be for a time, times, and a half; and when the power of the shatterer of the holy people will come to an end all these things will be finished.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I heard but I understood not. Then I said, \uc1\u8216*My lord, what will be the end of these things?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He said, \uc1\u8216*Go your way, Daniel; for the words are shut up and sealed until the time of the end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Many will cleanse themselves, and make themselves white, and be refined; but the wicked will do wickedly; and none of the wicked will understand, but they who are wise will understand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}From the time that the daily sacrifice will be taken away, and the appalling abomination set up will be twelve hundred and ninety days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Blessed is he who waits and comes to the thousand, three hundred and thirty-five days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But go your way to the end. You will take your rest and stand up to receive your lot at the end of the days.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

}