{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Zechariah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Zechariah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lesson from the Past

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the eighth month in the second year of Darius, this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} was furious with your ancestors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So tell the people this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts: \uc1\u8220*Return to me,\uc1\u8221* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8220*and I will return to you\uc1\u8221* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Do not be like your ancestors to whom the former prophets cried, \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says to turn now from your evil ways, and from your evil deeds\uc1\u8217*. They did not heed nor listen to me,\uc1\u8221* says the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Your ancestors, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But did not my words and my statutes with which I charged my servants the prophets overtake your ancestors? And they repented and said, \uc1\u8216*Just as the {\scaps Lord} of hosts planned to do to us, according to our ways, and according to our deeds, so he has dealt with us.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Jealous Love for Zion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I saw in the night a man on a red horse, among the myrtle trees that were in the valley-bottom. Behind him there were horses, red, sorrel, and white.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then said I, \uc1\u8220*My Lord, what are these?\uc1\u8221* And the messenger who was talking with me said, \uc1\u8220*I will show you what they are.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And the man who was standing among the myrtle trees answered, \uc1\u8220*They are those whom the {\scaps Lord} has sent to patrol the earth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And the riders answered the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} who was standing among the myrtle trees, \uc1\u8220*We have gone up and down through the world and behold, all the earth is still and at peace.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*{\scaps Lord} of hosts, how long will you have no pity for Jerusalem and the cities of Judah with which you have been angry for seventy years?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And the {\scaps Lord} answered the messenger who was talking with me with kind and comforting words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So the messenger who was talking with me said to me, \uc1\u8220*Proclaim now that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: I am deeply concerned for Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But I am deeply angry with the arrogant, complacent nations. I was only a little angry with Israel but they made the suffering worse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore, says the {\scaps Lord}, I am turning to show mercy to Jerusalem. My temple will be rebuilt in it, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and a measuring line will be stretched over Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Proclaim again: Thus says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts: My cities will again overflow with prosperity and the {\scaps Lord} will again comfort Zion and choose Jerusalem.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Destruction of the Heathen Powers

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now I looked up and saw four horns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I said to the messenger who was talking with me, \uc1\u8220*What are these?\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*These are the horns which scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then the {\scaps Lord} showed me four smiths.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I said, \uc1\u8220*What are these coming to do?\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*The horns scattered Judah, so that no one dared lift their head. But the smiths have come to terrify them, to crush the horns of the nations which lifted up their horn against the land of Judah to scatter its people.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise that Jerusalem Will be Gloriously Restored

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Then I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I said, \uc1\u8220*Where are you going?\uc1\u8221* He replied, \uc1\u8220*To measure Jerusalem, to see what is its breadth and length.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the messenger who talked with me stepped forward, and another messenger went out to meet him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Run and tell to that young man that Jerusalem will be inhabited like a village without walls, because so many people and cattle will live there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For I, says the {\scaps Lord}, will be a wall of fire around her, and I will be the glory in the midst of her.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Up! Away! Flee from the land of the north, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heavens, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Up, escape to Zion, you who live in Babylon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This is what the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says to the nations which plundered you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Whoever touches you touches the apple of my eye.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will raise my hand against them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They will be plunder for their own slaves; and you will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*Sing and rejoice, daughter of Zion! I am coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will live among you, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Many nations will join themselves to the {\scaps Lord} in that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and will be his people, and he will live among you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
You will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord} will inherit Judah as his portion in the holy land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He will again choose Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Be silent, everyone, in the presence of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because he is coming from his holy dwelling.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Purification of the Priesthood and Nation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Then he showed me Joshua, the high priest, standing before the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} and the Adversary standing at his right hand to accuse him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} said to the Adversary, \uc1\u8220*May the {\scaps Lord} rebuke you, Adversary! The {\scaps Lord}, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this man a brand plucked out of the fire?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments and was standing before the messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The messenger said to those who stood before him, \uc1\u8220*Take off his filthy garments.\uc1\u8221* Then to Joshua he said, \uc1\u8220*I have taken your guilt from you and I will clothe you in priestly robes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he ordered: \uc1\u8220*Set a clean turban upon his head.\uc1\u8221* So they set a clean turban on his head, and clothed him with garments. The messenger of the {\scaps Lord} was standing by.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} testified to Joshua:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: \uc1\u8220*If you walk in my ways, and if you will keep my instructions, then you will rule my house and keep my courts and I will give you a place of access among these that stand by.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Hear now, Joshua the high priest, you and your associates who sit before me; for they are men who are a sign; for I am going to bring forth my servant the Branch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On the stone that I have set before Joshua, on one stone, are seven facets. I will engrave it,\uc1\u8221* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8220*and I will remove the guilt of that land in one day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On that day,\uc1\u8221* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8220*you will each invite your neighbor under the vine and under the fig tree.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Supporters of the Temple Service

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Then the messenger who talked with me came again and woke me, as someone who is woken from sleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He said to me, \uc1\u8220*What do you see?\uc1\u8221* I said, \uc1\u8220*I see a candlestick, all of gold, with a bowl on its top, and seven lamps on it. There are seven pipes to each of the lamps, which are on its top,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and two olive trees next to it, one on the right side of the bowl, and the other on its left side.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I said to the messenger who talked with me, \uc1\u8220*What are these, my lord?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the messenger who talked with me answered, \uc1\u8220*Don\uc1\u8217*t you know what these are?\uc1\u8221* And I said. \uc1\u8220*No, my lord.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said to me, \uc1\u8220*This is the message of the {\scaps Lord} regarding Zerubbabel: Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}will I make the great mountain before Zerubbabel a plain. He will bring forth the top stones with shoutings of, \uc1\u8216*Grace, grace, to it.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Moreover this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house. His hands will also finish it. Then you will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For who has despised the day of small things? They will rejoice, and will see the plumb line in the hand of Zerubbabel. (The seven lamps are the eyes of the {\scaps Lord} that search all around the world.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Again I asked, \uc1\u8220*What are these two olive trees on the right side of the candlestick and on its left side?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Again, \uc1\u8220*What are these two branches of the olive trees, which are pouring out the golden oil through the two golden pipes?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He answered me, \uc1\u8220*Don\uc1\u8217*t you now what these are?\uc1\u8221* And I said, \uc1\u8220*No, my lord.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he explained, \uc1\u8220*They are the two anointed ones who attend the Lord of all the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Flying Scroll

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Then again I looked up and saw a flying scroll.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He said to me, \uc1\u8220*What do you see?\uc1\u8221* I answered, \uc1\u8220*I see a flying scroll; twenty cubits long, ten cubits wide.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then he said to me, \uc1\u8220*This is the curse that goes over the whole land. Every thief will be banished according to the writing on one side and everyone who lies under oath shall be banished according to the writing on the other side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I have sent it out, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and it will enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of anyone who swears falsely by my name. It will remain in the midst of his house and will consume it with its timber and its stones.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Woman in an Ephah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the messenger who talked with me came forward, and said to me, \uc1\u8220*Look up and see what is now coming.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I said. \uc1\u8220*What is it?\uc1\u8221* He said, \uc1\u8220*It is a measuring basket, full of the guilt of the land.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A round leaden cover was lifted up, and there was a woman sitting in the middle of the basket.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He said, \uc1\u8220*This is Wickedness.\uc1\u8221* He thrust her down into the midst of the basket and he pushed the round leaden cover back on its mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then I looked up and saw two women, and the wind was in their wings. They had wings like the wings of a stork and they lifted up the basket between them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then I said to the messenger who talked with me, \uc1\u8220*Where are they taking the basket?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He said to me, \uc1\u8220*To build her a house in the land of Shinar. When it is prepared, they will rest the basket there.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The War-Chariots of the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Again I looked up, and saw four chariots come from between two mountains. The mountains were mountains of bronze.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The first chariot had red horses. The second chariot had black horses,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}the third chariot white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled horses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I said to the messenger who talked with me, \uc1\u8220*What are these, my lord?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The messenger answered me, \uc1\u8220*These are the four winds of heaven going out after standing before the {\scaps Lord} of all the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The black horses are going toward the north country and the white toward the west and the dappled toward the south country.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The strong horses came out, and were impatient to patrol the earth. So he said, \uc1\u8220*Go, patrol the earth,\uc1\u8221* and they did so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then he cried out to me, \uc1\u8220*The horses that went to the north country will quiet my spirit in the north country.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Preparations for the Crowning of Zerubbabel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Take the gifts from the exiles Heldai, Tobijah and Jedaiah who have come from Babylon and go at once to Josiah the son of Zephaniah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Take their silver and gold and make a crown and set it on the head of the high priest, Joshua son of Jehozadak.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Tell him: \uc1\u8220*Thus says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts: Behold, the man whose name is the Branch. He will branch out from his place and rebuild the temple of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He will rebuild the temple and will sit and rule upon his throne, receiving the honor due to a king. A priest will stand by his throne and they will work together in peace and harmony.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The crown will be a memorial in the temple of the {\scaps Lord} for Heldai and Tobijah and Jedaiah, and Josiah the son of Zephaniah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}People from far away will come and build in the temple of the {\scaps Lord} and you will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me to you. This will happen if you diligently obey the voice of the {\scaps Lord} your God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Real Demands

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}In the fourth year of the reign of King Darius, on the fourth day of Chislev, the ninth month, the message of the {\scaps Lord} came to Zechariah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The city of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech and their men, to entreat the favor of the {\scaps Lord},{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and to ask the priests of the house of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and the prophets \uc1\u8220*Should I continue to mourn in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done for many years?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Tell all the people of the land and the priests, \uc1\u8220*When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and in the seventh month, for these seventy years, did you really fast for me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When you eat and when you drink, do you not eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Wasn\uc1\u8217*t it this which the {\scaps Lord} proclaimed by the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and prosperous, and her towns surrounding her and the Negreb and the Shephelah were inhabited?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} gave this message to Zechariah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says, execute true judgments. Show kindness and mercy to each other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Do not oppress the widow or the orphan, the resident foreigner or the poor. Let none of you devise evil against another in your hearts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But they refused to listen, and turned a stubborn shoulder, and stopped their ears so they wouldn\uc1\u8217*t hear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They made their hearts as hard as stone so they wouldn\uc1\u8217*t accept the teaching and the words that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts had sent by his spirit through the earlier prophets. Great was the anger of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I called and they would not hear, so they call and I do not hear, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I scattered them by a whirlwind out among nations unknown to them. The land was left desolate behind them, with no one crossing or returning, for they made the pleasant land a desolation.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promises that the Scattered Exiles Will Return and the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Rule be Widely Acknowledged

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Now this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts came to me:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I passionately care for Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I am fiercely protective of her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} says, I have returned to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Jerusalem will be called, \uc1\u8216*The City of Truth\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the mountain of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*The Holy Mountain.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Old men and old women will sit again in the squares of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
each leaning on a staff because of old age.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the streets of the city will be full of boys,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and of girls playing in its squares.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Just because it seems impossible to the remnant of this people in these days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
is it also impossible for me? says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will rescue my people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from the land of the east and the land of the west.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will bring them and they will live in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will be my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I will be their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in truth and righteousness.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: Let your hands be strong, you who hear in these days the words of the prophets spoken when the foundations for the house of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts were laid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For before those days there were no wages for people or animals. No one could go out or return safe from enemies, because I set each against their neighbor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But now I will treat the remnant of the people differently from former days, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Peace will be sown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The vine will bear its fruit and the ground will yield its produce,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the skies will give their dew.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will give the remnant of this people all these things.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Just as you were accursed among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
house of Judah and house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so I will save you and you will be a blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Do not be afraid, but let your hands be strong.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: As I planned to do evil to you when your ancestors provoked me to anger, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and I did not relent,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so again have I planned in these days to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not be afraid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}These are the things that you should do: Speak the truth to each other. Render peaceful decisions in your gates.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Let none of you devise evil in your heart against one another. Do not love perjury. All these are things I hate, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, will be festivals of joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts for the house of Judah. Therefore love truth and peace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: Peoples, and the inhabitants of many cities will come,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and the inhabitants of one city will go to another, saying, \uc1\u8220*Let us go speedily to entreat the favor of the {\scaps Lord}, and to seek the {\scaps Lord} of hosts; I will go also.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Many peoples and strong nations will come to seek the {\scaps Lord} of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the favor of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: In those days ten people from all languages and nations will take hold of the robe of a Jew, saying, \uc1\u8220*We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Conquest of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Foes

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}An oracle:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The message of the {\scaps Lord} concerns the land of Hadrach,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
it rests upon Damascus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For the capital of Aram belongs to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as the tribes of Israel do,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and also Hamath which borders on it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Tyre and Sidon, for all their wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Tyre built for herself a fortress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Heaped up silver as dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and gold like the dirt of the streets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But now the Lord will dispossess her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
cast down her rampart into the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
She will be consumed in fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Ashkelon will see and fear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Gaza writhe in anguish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ekron, also for her hope will be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The king will perish from Gaza,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ashkelon will remain uninhabited.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}A foreign people will settle in Ashdod,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I will humble the pride of the Philistines.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will take their blood from their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their abominations from between their teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They also will be a remnant for our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a clan in Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Ekron will be like the Jebusites.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But I will encamp as a guard about my house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so that none will pass through or return,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and no oppressor will pass through them again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for now I have seen with my own eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Shout aloud, daughter of Jerusalem!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Look, your king comes to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Vindicated and victorious is he,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
humble, and riding on a donkey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He will cut off chariots from Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and war horses from Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The battle bow will be cut off,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and he will speak peace to the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His rule will be from sea to sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from the river to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And you, too \uc1\u8211* because of your blood covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I have set free your prisoners from the waterless pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}To the stronghold will the prisoners of hope return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
This day I declare, I will restore double to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For I have bent Judah to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a bow which I have filled with Ephraim like an arrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will urge your sons, Zion, against the sons of Greece,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will make you like the sword of a hero.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the {\scaps Lord} will be seen above them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and his arrow will go forth like lightning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} will blow a blast upon a trumpet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and travel on the whirlwinds of the south.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts will defend them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They will devour and tread down the slingstones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will drink their blood like wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will be full like a bowl,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like the crevices of the altar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the {\scaps Lord} their God will save them on that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as the flock of his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as the jewel of a crown
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
shining in his land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}How good and how beautiful will it be!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Corn will make the young men flourish
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and new wine the young women!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Victory and Restoration for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Betrayed but Loyal People

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Ask from the {\scaps Lord} rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
at the time of spring rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from the {\scaps Lord} who forms the storm clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the showers of rain he gives to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and green in the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But the household gods speak nonsense,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the diviners see lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and relate idle dreams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In vain they offer comfort,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so the people wander like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They suffer because there is no shepherd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}My wrath is hot against the shepherds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and on the leaders will I bring punishment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord} cares for his flock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the house of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and will make them his splendid war steeds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}From Judah will come the cornerstone and the stay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from them the battle bow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from them goes forth every commander.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Together they will trample on warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as on the dirt of the streets in battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They fight, for the {\scaps Lord} is with them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
putting the riders on horses to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will make strong the house of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will bring deliverance to the house of Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will bring them back for I have compassion on them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will be as if I had not driven them away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For I am the {\scaps Lord} their God and will answer them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The Ephraimites will be like warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their hearts will rejoice as with wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their children will see and rejoice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Their hearts will exult in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will whistle for them, and gather them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will be as many as they once were.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will sow them among the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but in distant lands they will remember me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will bring up their children and come back.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I will bring them home from the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and from Assyria will I gather them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Into the land of Gilead and Lebanon I will bring them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
until the land overflows with them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And when they pass through the sea of distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will strike down the waves of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and all the deeps of the Nile will be dried up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The pride of Assyria will be brought low
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the sceptre of Egypt turned aside.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will make them strong in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will walk in his name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Fate of Judah\uc1\u8217*s Traitorous Rulers and the Ultimate Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Open your doors, Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so that fire may devour your cedars.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Wail, pine-tree, for the cedar is fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Wail, oaks of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for the inaccessible forest has fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Listen to the wailing of the shepherds!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Their glory is destroyed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Listen to the roaring of young lions!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Blasted is the thick forest of the Jordan.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} said to me: shepherd the flock destined for slaughter,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}whose possessors slaughter them, and hold themselves not guilty! The people who sell them say, Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, for I am rich! And their own shepherds have no compassion for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will no longer have pity on the people of this earth, says the {\scaps Lord}. I will turn neighbor against neighbor, and put everyone under the power of a king, and when the land is devastated I will not rescue them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So I shepherded the flock of slaughter for the sheep-merchants. I took two staffs: one I called Mercy and the other I called Union. So I shepherded the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I set aside three of the shepherds in one month; for I was indignant against them, and they also were displeased at me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I said, I will not shepherd you. What is dead, let it die. What is set aside, let it be set aside. And let those who are left devour one another\uc1\u8217*s flesh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I took my staff, Mercy, and broke it, so as to break my covenant which I had made with all the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In that day it was broken, and the sheep-merchants who watched me knew that it was the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And I said to them, \uc1\u8220*If it is good in your sight, give me my wage. If not, don\uc1\u8217*t.\uc1\u8221* So they weighed out my wage, thirty pieces of silver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And the {\scaps Lord} said to me, Cast it into the treasury \uc1\u8211* the precious wage that at which I was valued by them! So I took the thirty pieces of silver and cast them into the house of the {\scaps Lord}, into the treasury.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then I broke my second staff called Union so as to dissolve the brotherhood between Judah and Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And the {\scaps Lord} said to me: Take again the implements of a worthless shepherd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For I am about to appoint a shepherd over the land. Those who are thrust down he will not visit. Those who are scattered he will not seek out. The wounded he will not heal, the sick he will not make whole, but the flesh of the fat he will devour and even their hoofs he will tear.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Woe to my worthless shepherd, who deserts the flock!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
May the sword strike his arm and his right eye.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
May his arm completely wither.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And his right eye be blinded.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s Deliverance from Heathen Attack

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}An oracle. This is the message of the {\scaps Lord} about Israel. The {\scaps Lord} who stretches out the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the human spirit within people says:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Look! I am about to make Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a cup of drunkenness for all the surrounding peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There will be a siege of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On that day that I will make Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a stone to be lifted up by all the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
All who lift it up will surely hurt themselves!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And all the nations of the earth will be gathered together against it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On that day, says the {\scaps Lord}, I will strike
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
every horse with panic and its rider with madness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But over the house of Judah I will keep watch,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
though I strike every horse belonging to the peoples with blindness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the chieftains of Judah will say to themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The strength of the inhabitants is in the {\scaps Lord} of hosts their God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In that day I will make the chieftains of Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a pan of fire in the woods,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a torch among sheaves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will devour right and left all the surrounding peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But Jerusalem will abide on its own site.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And the {\scaps Lord} will first give victory to the tents of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so that the glory of the house of David, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem be not exalted above Judah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In that day the {\scaps Lord} will protect the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the feeblest among them will in that day be like David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the house of David like God, like the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} before them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And in that day I will seek to destroy all the nations who have come up against Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the spirit of pity and compassion. They will look on him whom they have pierced
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will lament for him as one laments for an only son.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They will bitterly grieve for him as one grieves for the firstborn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In that day mourning will be as great in Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as the mourning for Hadad-rimmon in the plain of Megiddo.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And the land will mourn, each family by itself:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the family of the house of David by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the family of the house of Nathan by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and the family of the house of Levi by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the family of the Shimeites by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and all the families who are left, each by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their wives by themselves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}On that day a fountain will be opened for the house of David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And it will be on that day, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will cut off the names of the idols from the land and they will be remembered no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And the prophets and the unclean spirit I will banish from the land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If any man prophesy any more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his father and his mother who bore him, will say to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*You will not live, for you speak falsehood in the name of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And his father and his mother who bore him will stab him through when he is seized by the prophetic frenzy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And it will be in that day that the prophets will be ashamed, each of his vision,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and will not wear the hairy mantle in order to deceive.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Each will say, \uc1\u8220*I am not a prophet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a tiller of the ground am I, for the ground is my possession from my youth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And they will say to him, \uc1\u8220*What are these scars on your back?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And he will say, \uc1\u8220*The scars which I received in the house of my friends.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Awake, sword, against my shepherd,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
against the man who stands near to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will strike the shepherd so that the sheep may be scattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will turn my hand against the little ones.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In all the land, says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
two-thirds in it will be cut off and die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but a third will be left in it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will bring the third into the fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and melt it as one melts silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and test it as one tests gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Then they will call on my name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I myself will answer them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will say, \uc1\u8220*They are my people.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They will say, \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} is our God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Judgment upon the Heathen and the Exaltation of the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}A day is coming for the {\scaps Lord}, when your plundered possessions will be divided while you watch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And all the nations will gather to Jerusalem, to fight against it. The city will be taken and the houses plundered and the women raped. Half of the city will go into captivity, and the rest of the people left in the ruins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the {\scaps Lord} will go forth and fight against these nations, as once he fought in the day of battle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, (which is opposite Jerusalem, on the east). The Mount of Olives will be split into halves, from east to west, by an exceedingly great valley; and half of the mountain will slide northwards and half southwards.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You will escape through my valley \uc1\u8211* the valley between the hills will extend as far as Azel, and you will flee as you fled from before the earthquake, in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. But the {\scaps Lord} your God will come, and all the holy ones with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And in that day, there will be no heat nor cold nor frost,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but it will be constant day \uc1\u8211* it is known to the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211* with neither day nor night. Even at evening time there will be light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And on that day living waters will flow from Jerusalem, half of them to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea; in both summer and winter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} will be king over all the earth. On that day the {\scaps Lord} will be one, and his name one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The land will be changed to plain, from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem, but Jerusalem will be high and inhabited as it stands, from the Benjamin Gate up to the place of the first gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the Corner Gate, and as far as the king\uc1\u8217*s winepresses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Jerusalem will be inhabited, for never again will it be doomed to destruction, and its people will abide in security.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This is the plague with which the {\scaps Lord} will strike all the peoples who array themselves against Jerusalem: he will make their flesh rot while they stand on their feet, and their eyes will rot in their sockets, and their tongues will rot in their mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On that day a great panic sent by the Lord will fall on them. Everyone will seize their neighbours and attack them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Even Judah will fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of the surrounding nations will be gathered up \uc1\u8211* gold and silver and piles of clothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Plague will fall upon the horses, mules, camels, and asses, and on all the animals in all those camps.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}All who are left of all the nations which fought against Jerusalem will come up from year to year to worship the King, the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and to keep the pilgrim-feast of tabernacles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Whoever of all the peoples of the earth will not come up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, on them there will be no rain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If the family of Egypt does not go up nor enter in, on them also will come the plague with which the {\scaps Lord} will strike the nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This will be the punishment for the sin of Egypt and the punishment for the sin of all nations which do not come up to keep the feast of the tabernacles.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}On that day there will be inscribed upon the bells of the horses, \uc1\u8216*Holy to the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217* and the pots in the house of the {\scaps Lord} will be as holy as the sacrificial bowls before the altars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy to the {\scaps Lord} of hosts and all who sacrifice will come and take of them and cook the sacrifices in them. There will be no more traffickers in the house of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts in that day.
\par}

}