{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Job (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 JOB

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prologue

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Piety and Prosperity

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the land of Uz there was a man called Job\uc1\u8211*a man blameless and upright, who feared God and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}shunned evil. He had a family of seven sons and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}three daughters: and he owned seven thousandsheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yokeof oxen, five hundred she-asses, and a vast train ofservants, so that he was the richest man in all the{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}East. Now his sons used to hold feast day about,and they would send and invite their three sisters{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}to eat and drink with them; and when the cycleof feasts was over, Job used to send for them andprepare them for worship, rising early and offeringburnt offerings for them all: for \uc1\u8211* said Job\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Perchance my children have sinned
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And cursed God in their heart.And this Job never failed to do.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Heavenly Council. Satan is permitted to test the Quality of Job\uc1\u8217*s Piety

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now on a certain day the heavenly Beingscame to present themselves before Jehovah, and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}among them came Satan. Then Jehovah askedSatan where he had come from, and Satan answeredJehovah thus, "From ranging the earth and from{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}walking up and down it." Then Jehovah said toSatan:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"Hast thou noted my servant Job,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That on earth there is none like him\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A man blameless and upright,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who fears God and shuns evil?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}To this Satan made answer:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But is it for nothing that Job fears God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Hast Thou not Thyself fenced him and his house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And all he possesses on every side?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The work of his hands Thou hast blessed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his substance abounds in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But put forth Thy hand and touch all he possesses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And assuredly then to Thy face he will curse Thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Whereat Jehovah said to Satan:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"See! all he possesses is in thy power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But lay not thy hand on the man himself."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Then forth Satan went from the presence of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Blows Fall
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Now on a certain day, as his sons and daughtersWere eating and drinking wine in the house of their{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}eldest brother, suddenly a messenger appearedbefore Job with the tidings:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"The oxen were hard at the plough;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the asses were feeding beside them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When sabeans fell upon them and seized them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The servants they slew with the sword\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Only I alone am escaped to tell thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}While he was still speaking, another came and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"The fire of God has fallen from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And burnt to a cinder the sheep and the servants\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Only I alone am escaped to tell thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}While he was still speaking, another came and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"Chaldeans, formed into three bands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Made a raid on the camels and seized them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The servants they slew with the sword\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Only I alone am escaped to tell thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}While he was still speaking, another came and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the house of their eldest brother:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}On a sudden a mighty wind
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
From the other side of the desert
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
came and smote and four sides of the house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That it fell on the young folk and killed them\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Only I alone am escaped to tell thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then Job rose and rent his robe; and, after shaving
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his head, he threw himself with these words pros-
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
trate upon the ground:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}"Naked came I from my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And naked thither must I return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Jehovah hath given, Jehovah hath taken:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The name of Jehovah be blessed."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}In all this Job committed no sin, nor did he charge
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God with unseemly dealing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Second Council

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Now on a certain day the heavenly Beings cameto present themselves before Jehovah, and amongthem came Satan to present himself before Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then Jehovah asked Satan where he had come from,and satan answered Jehovah thus, "From rangingthe earth and from walking up and down it."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Jehovah said to Satan:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"Hast thou noted my servant Job,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That on earth there is none like him\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A man blameless and upright,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who fears God and shuns evil?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And still he clings to his honour\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In vain hast thou set me on to destroy him."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}To this Satan made answer:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"Skin for skin;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
All a man\uc1\u8217*s goods will he give for his life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But put forth Thy hand, touch his bone and his flesh
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And assuredly then to Thy face he will curse Thee."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Whereat Jehovah said to Satan:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"See! he is on thy power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But take heed that thou spare his life."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then forth Satan went from the presence of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Second Test

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
And he smote Job from the sole of his foot to the{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}crown of his head with boils so grievous that hetook a potsherd to scratch with; and, as he was{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}sitting among the ashes, his wife said to him:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"Art thou clinging still to thine honour?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Curse God and die."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Job said to her:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"Must thou too speak
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As a foolish women speak?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
We accept from God what is good:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Shall we not accept what is evil?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In all this Job was guilty of no sin of speech.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Friends Come to Comfort Him

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When Job\uc1\u8217*s three friends heard of all the miserythat had come upon him, they travelled each manfrom his own place \uc1\u8211* Eliphaz the Temabite, Bildadthe Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for theyhad made a tyrst together to come to condole with{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}him and comfort him. But when they caught aglimpse of him at a distance they did not recognizehim. Then every man of them wept aloud andtore his robe and scattered dust heavenwards upon{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}his head. Then they sat down beside him upon theground seven days and nights, and no one said a wordto him; for they saw that his pain was very great.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Thereafter Job opened his mouth to curse his{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}day, and thus he began:
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 ACT 1

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Lament and Longing for Death

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Perished the day wherein I was born,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the night which announced that a man-child had come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4a}Utter darkness let that night be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9b}Looking for light, but finding none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4b}May God in the heights above ask not after it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4c}And may no beam shine forth upon it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}May darkness and gloom claim it for their own,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And may the thick cloud rest upon it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Black vapours of the day affright it!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And let the thick darkness snatch it away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
May it not be joined to the days of the year,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or enter into the tale of the months.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As for that night, let it be barren:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
May there never ring through it a cry of joy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Accursed of sorcerers be that day\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Of those that are skilful to stir up Leviathan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9a}Dark be the stars of its morning twilight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9c}And never the eyelids of Dawn may it see;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Since it shut not the doors of my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And hid not trouble from mine eyes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Why died I not at my birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Breathe my last as I came from the womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Why on the knees was I welcomed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And why were there breasts to suck?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For then had I lain down in quiet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then had I slept and had rest\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}With kings of the earth and with cousellors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who built stately tombs for themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Or with princes rich in gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who had filled their houses with silver.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Like a hidden untimely birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like infants that never see light?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}There the wicked cease their tumult,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
There the weary are at rest\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Prisoners at ease together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Deaf to the taskmaster\uc1\u8217*s voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There the small and the great are alike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the servants is free from his master.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Why is light given to the wretched,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And life to the bitter in soul,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Such as long for death, but it comes not,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And dig for it more than for treasure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Who would joy o\uc1\u8217*er a mound of stones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And rejoice, could they find a grave?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}To the man whose path is obscured,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who is hedged round about by God\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For my bread there comes to me sighing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My groans are poured out like water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For the evil I fear overtakes me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The things that I dread comes upon me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Scarce have I ease or quiet
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or rest, when tumult cometh.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Eliphaz\uc1\u8217*s Comfortable Exhortation and Revelation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May we lift up a word unto thee who art fainting,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For who has the heart to restrain his speech?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}see! thou hast instructed many,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And strengthened the drooping hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Thy words used to set up the stumbling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And strengthen the tottering knees.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But now that it comes upon thee, thou art faint;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Now that it reaches thyself, thou art terrified.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Is not thy religion thy confidence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And thy blameless life thy hope?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Bethink thee: has an innocent man ever perished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or when have the just been cut off?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It is those who plough wrong and sow trouble
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That reap it: \uc1\u8211* for this have I seen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}By the breath of God they perish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
At the blast of HIs anger they vanish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The Lion roared, the hoarse lion thundered:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But his young lion\uc1\u8217*s teeth were broken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So for lack of prey he perished,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the cubs of the lioness are scattered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Now to me a word came stealing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And mine ear caught a whisper thereof,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In thoughts from the visions of night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When deep sleep falleth on men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Fear came upon me and trembling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That made my bones all quake.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then a breath passed over my face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The hair of my flesh bristled up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}There \uc1\u8211* it \uc1\u8211* stood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I could not tell what it looked like\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
This form before mine eyes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the silence I heard a voice say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}"Can mortal be just before God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or a man clean before his Creator?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}See! He putteth no trust in His servants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His angels He chargeth with folly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}How much more those whose houses are clay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Whose very foundation is dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Who die before the moth,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Crushed between morning and evening,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Bruised without any regarding it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Perished for evermore!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The cord of their tent is torn from them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They die \uc1\u8211* but without learning wisdom."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Call now: will any one answer?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To which of the saints wilt thou turn?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For vexation killeth the fool,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Indignation slayeth the simpleton.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I have seen a fool taking root,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But his branch became suddenly rotten,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}His children were far from help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Crushed beyond hope deliverance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The hungry eat up their harvest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the thirsty draw from their wells.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For not from the dust riseth ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor out of the ground springeth trouble;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But man is born unto trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
While the sons of flame soar above it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Were it I, I would seek unto God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My cause I would bring before God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Who doeth great things and unsearchable,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Marvellous things without number,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Who bringeth rain over the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And over the fields sendeth water\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Setting the lowly on high,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And lifting the mourners to safety,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Frustrating the plots of the crafty
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And robbing their hands of success,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So taking the wise in their guile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That their tortuous plans fail through rashness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They feel in the day as in darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
At noontide they grope as at night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the needy He saves from the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the poor from the hands of the mighty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Thus hope is born in the weak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And iniquity stoppeth her mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Happy then the mortal whom God correcteth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So spurn no thou the Almighty\uc1\u8217*s chastening.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For He bindeth the wounds He hath made,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And His hands heal the hurt He hath dealt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He will save thee in six distresses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In seven no evil shall touch thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In famine He frees thee from death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And in war from the power of the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}From the scourge of tongue thou art safe;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou shalt fear not the onslaught of ruin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}At ruin and dearth shalt thou laugh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the beasts of the field thou shalt fear not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For the stones of the earth are thine allies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The beasts of the field are thy friends.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Thou shalt know that thy tent is secure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou shalt visit thy fold and miss nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Thy seed thou shalt know to be many,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thine offspring as grass of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Thou shalt come to the grave in thy strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As a sheaf cometh in its season.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}See! this we have searched \uc1\u8211* so it is.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
We have heard it \uc1\u8211* lay thou it to heart.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Denunciation of Hollow Friendship. His Challenge
of God and His Longing to be Gone
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}O could my vexation be carefully weighed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my misery set in the balance against it!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For it is more heavy than sand of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And therefore it is that my words are wild.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For the arrows of God Almighty are in me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My spirit drinketh their fiery poison.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The terrors of God are arrayed against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7a}My soul refuseth to be at rest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Doth the wild ass bray as he nibbles the grass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And over their fodder do oxen low?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Can a man eat that which is tasteless and saltless?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Is there any taste in the slime of the yolk?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O that I might have my request,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That God would grant me the thing that I long for!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}O that God would consent to crush me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To let His hand loose and cut me off!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So should I still have this for my comfort\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Leaping for joy amid torture unsparing\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That I had not concealed the words of the Holy One.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}What is my strength, that I should endure?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Or what is mine end, that I should be patient?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Is my strength the strength of stones?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or was I created with flesh of brass?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Behold! I have no help in myself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the power to achieve is driven from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}To one who is fainting a friend should be kind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Even though he forsaketh the fear of Almighty
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But my brethen have dealt like a treacherous torrent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like channels that overflow their banks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Which are turbid because of the ice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the snow that hides within them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, when they are scorched, they vanish:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the heat they are quenched from their place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The caravans bend their course thither,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Go up through the waste, and perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The caravans of Tema looked out for them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The companies of Sheba kept hoping:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But their confidence brought them to shame;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When they came to the place, they blushed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Such now have ye proved unto me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When ye look on the terror, ye shudder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Did I ask you to give me a present,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or make me a gift of your substance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}To rescue me from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or from hand of the tyrant to free me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Teach me, and I will be silent;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Show me wherein I have erred.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}How sweet are words that are true!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But when you reprove, what is reproved?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Is it words that ye mean to reprove?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But for winds are the words of despair.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Would ye throw yourselves on the innocent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or make an assault on your friend?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Now look upon me, I pray you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I would surely not lie in your face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}O turn back \uc1\u8211* let there be no injustice:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Turn back, for the right is still mine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Is my tongue altogether perverted?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Have I lost the sense of wrong?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Hath man on the earth not a warfare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With days like the days of a hireling?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Like a slave that pants for the shadow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
A hireling that longs for his wages,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So empty months are my portion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And wearisome nights mine appointment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I lie down, saying, "When cometh day?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When I rise, methinks, "When cometh even?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I am full of unrest till the dawn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Worms and clods clothe my flesh;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My skin grows hard and then breaks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}My days are more swift than a shuttle;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They come to an end without hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}O remember my life is but breath;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Mine eyes shall see good nevermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The eye that now sees me shall see me no more;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thine eyes shall look for me, but I shall be gone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Like the cloud that is spent and that passeth away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He that goes down to Sheol shall come up no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He shall never come back to his house again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the place that was his shall know him no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So my mouth I will not restrain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will utter mine anguish of spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Pour out mine embittered soul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Am I a sea or a sea-monster,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That upon me Thou settest a watch?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When I look to my couch to comfort me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To my bed for relief of my sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Thou scarest me with dreams,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And with visions dost so affright me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}That gladly would I be strangled:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Death itself I spurn in my pain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I would not live for ever:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Let me go, for my days are but breath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}What is man, that so great Thou dost count him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And settest Thine heart upon him\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Visiting him every morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And testing him moment by moment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O when wilt Thou turn Thine eyes from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And leave me though but for a moment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}If I sin, how does that harm Thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
O Thou who art Watcher of men?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Why dost Thou make me Thy target?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Why burden Thyself with me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Why not forgive my sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And pass mine iniquity by?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For now I shall lie in the dust;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou shalt search, but I shall not be.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Bildad\uc1\u8217*s Appeal to the Teaching of Tradition

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How long wilt thou utter these things\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
These thy blustering windy words?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Is God a perverter of justice?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Almighty subverter of right?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}If thy children, for sinning against Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He has left to bear their transgressions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet seek thou thyself unto God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And supplicate the Almighty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And if thou art pure and upright,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thy righteous abode He will prosper;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And, though thy beginning be slender,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thine end He shall greatly increase.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For inquire thou of past generations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Regard the search of the fathers:\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For we are but dullards of yesterday,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Whose days on the earth are a shadow\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Shall they not give thee instruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And bring forth words out of their heart?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Can the rush shoot high without swamp,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or the reed grow up without water?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}While yet in its freshness, unplucked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Of all herbs it withers most quickly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So end all who put God out of mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the hope of the hypocrite dies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}His confidence is but a thread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his trust as the web of a spider.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He leans on his house, but it stands not:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He grasps, but it cannot endure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Like a plant is he, fresh in the sunshine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With suckers that shoot o\uc1\u8217*er the garden.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Its roots are entwined round the well,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
It lays hold of its stone habitation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But when it is ruined, the spot
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Denies having ever beheld it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Thus its course ends in desolation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And out of the dust springs another."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}See! God spurns not an innocent man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But He will not uphold evildoers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He will yet fill thy mouth with laughter
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thy lips with a shout of joy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Thy foes shall be clothed with shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the tent of the wicked shall vanish.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Challenge of Immoral Omnipotence

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Yes, truly: I know it is so:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But with God how can man urge his right?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Should He choose to contend against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He could answer not one in a thousand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Wise-hearted and strong as He is,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who hath ever successfully braved Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Mountains He moves without effort,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He turns them about in His anger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He shaketh the earth from her place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And maketh her pillars shudder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He speaks to the sun, and it shines not;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He setteth a seal on the stars.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He strecheth the heavens all alone;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He treadeth the heights of the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He maketh the Bear and Orion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Pleiades and the southern chambers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He doeth great things and unsearchable,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Marvellous things without number.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Lo! He passes me by all unseen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Sweeps past \uc1\u8211* but I cannot perceive Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He seizeth, and who can prevent Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who dare ask Him, "What doest Thou?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}God will not withdraw His anger;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The helpers of Rahab stooped under Him:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}How much less can I give Him answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And choose out my words against Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Were I right, I could give Him no answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But needs must entreat my Judge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If I called, He would give me no answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I cannot believe He would listen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For He Crushes me in a temptest
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With many a wanton wound.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}He suffers me not to take breath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But with bitterness He fills me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Is it question of strength? There He is.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or of justice? Then who will implead Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Am I right? Still mine own mouth condemns me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Innocent? He proveth me perverse.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Innocent I am \uc1\u8211* but I reck not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I spurn my life; \uc1\u8217*tis all one.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And therefore it is that I say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"He destroyeth both guiltless and guilty."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When the scourge bringeth sudden death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The despair of the blameless He mocketh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}He hath given up the earth to the wicked;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He veileth the face of its judges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
If it be not He, who then?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}My days are more swift than a runner,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They flee unillumined by joy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They glide like the ships of reed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like an eagle that darts on its prey.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}If I vow to forget my plaint
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And to wear a bright face for a joyless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I shudder at all my pains;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I know Thou wilt not hold me guiltless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I then am I infallibly guilty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So why should I labour in vain?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For though I wash me with snow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And cleanse my hands with lye,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Thou wouldst plunge me then in the mire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So that even my friends would abhor me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Thou art not a man like myself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That we come into judgment together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}O for an umpire between us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To lay his hand on us both!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Let Him take but His rod from off me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And affright me no more with His terrors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And then I would speak unafraid\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For not such at heart am I.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}In my soul is a loathing of life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will let my complaint loose against Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will say to God, "Do not condemn me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But show me the ground of Thy quarrel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What dost Thou gain from oppressing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And spurning the work of Thy hands?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Hast Thou then eyes of flesh?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or seest Thou as man seeth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Are Thy days like the days of mortals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Or Thy years like the days of man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}That Thou shouldest seek out my guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And make this search for my sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Though Thou knowest I am not guilty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And no treachery cleaves to my hand?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Thy hands did fashion and mould me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And now wilt Thou turn and destroy me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Remember Thou madest me like clay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And back to the dust wilt Thou bring me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Didst Thou not pour me out like milk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And curdle me after like cheese,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Clothe me with skin and with flesh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And knit me with bones and with sinews?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Life Thou didst grant me and favour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thy Providence guarded my spirit;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}While this was Thy secret heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And this was Thy purpose, I know.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Do I sin? Then Thou dost observe me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And refuse to acquit me of guilt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Am I wicked? Then woe us me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Just? I dare not lift up my head\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Full of shame and drunken with sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If I rise, like a lion Thou huntest me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Working fresh marvels upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And bringing new witness against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thine anger with me Thou increasest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou musterest fresh hosts against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}O why from the womb didst Thou bring me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
O why died I not all unseen?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}O to be as though I had not been,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Borne from the womb to the grave!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Are the days of my life not few?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
O leave me to smile a little,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Ere I go to return no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To the land of darkness and gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}To the land of murky darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Of gloom and utter confusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Where the very light is as darkness."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Zophar\uc1\u8217*s Appeal to the Unsearchable Wisdom

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Then Zophar of Naamah answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Should a voluble man go unanswered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
A man who but babbles be justified?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Must men hold their peace at thy bragging?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thy mocking is no one to curb?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Thou maintainest thy way to be pure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And thyself to be clean in His sight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But oh that God would speak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And open His lips against thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And show thee the secrets of wisdom\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How marvellous are her achievements!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For then thou shouldst know that thy guilt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
God remembers not wholly against thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Canst thou find out the deep things of God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or come nigh the Almighty\uc1\u8217*s perfection?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It is higher than heaven \uc1\u8211* what canst thou?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Deeper than Sheol \uc1\u8211* what knowest thou?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Longer than earth is its measure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And broader it is than the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When He sweeps past and puts men in durance
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And calls them to trial, who can turn Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For well He knoweth vain men:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He looks upon sin and He marks it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Even a senseless man may be taught,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As a wild ass\uc1\u8217*s colt may be caught.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Now, if thou wouldst prepare thy heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And stretch out thy hands unto Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And put away sin from thy hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And let wrong dwell no more in thy tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then thy face thou wouldst lift without blemish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And thou wouldst be steadfast and fearless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yea, thou wouldst forget thy sorrow\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As floods that are passed wouldst thou think of it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Brighter than noon would thy life rise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thy darkness would be as the morning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Secure wouldst thou be in thy hope:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou couldst lie without trembling or care\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Lay thee down without one to affright thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And many would sue for thy favour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The place of their refuge is perished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their hope is \uc1\u8211* to breathe their last.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Independent Criticism of this World and his Glimpse beyond it

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Verily ye are the people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And wisdom shall die with you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But, like you, I have understanding;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who knoweth not things like these?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A laughing-stock to his friend
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Is become one whose cry God had answered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A laughing-stock is the righteous;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 The}blameless is doomed to disaster.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The man of ease mocks at his fate:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
There are thrusts for the feet that are slipping.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It is tents of robbers that prosper,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And those who vex God that are safe\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Those who say, "Is not God in my hand?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But inquire of the beasts \uc1\u8211* they will teach thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The birds of the air \uc1\u8211* they will show thee:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The creatures that crawl \uc1\u8211* they will teach thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The fish of the sea \uc1\u8211* they will tell thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For which of them all doth not know
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That the hand of Jehovah hath wrought this\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In whose hand are all living souls
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the breath of all humankind?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Doth not the ear test words
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As the palate tastes food for itself?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Doth wisdom depend upon years,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Understanding on length of days?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}With Him is wisdom and might,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Understanding and counsel are His.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}See! He breaketh down, and who buildeth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Imprisons, and none can set free.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}See! He holds back the floods and they dry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then He hurls them on earth and confounds it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}With Him is strength and achievement;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Deceived and deceiver are His.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The wise men of earth He makes foolish;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The judges He turns into madmen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The fetters kings rivet He loosens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And binds their own loins with a chain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He leadeth priests barefoot away;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Ancient families He overturneth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He removeth the speech of the trusty;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The elders He robs of discretion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He poureth contempt upon princes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He looseth the belt of the strong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He revealeth the deep things of darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The gloom-wrapped He bringeth to light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He makes nations great and destroys them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Expands them, then hurls them to ruin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Earth\uc1\u8217*s chiefs He bereaves of their judgment;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They wander in trackles wastes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Where they grope in the unit darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And stagger like drunken men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Lo! all this mine eye hath seen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Mine ear hath heard it and marked it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}What ye know, that I know too;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I am not one whit behind you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But I would address the Almighty\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With God I am longing to reason:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For ye are smearers of lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Good-for-nothing physicians-each man of you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}O that ye were but silent\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then might ye be counted as wise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now listen to this mine indictment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Attend to the plea of my lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Is it God that ye utter your lies for?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Do ye speak you deceit for him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And to Him would ye show your favour?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And God\uc1\u8217*s is the cause ye would plead?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Were it well if He searched you out?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Can ye mock Him as men are mocked?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For He will punish you sore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
If ye secretly show Him your favour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Shall His majesty not make you shudder?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Shall the dread of Him not full upon you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Your maxims are proverbs of ashes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Your bulwarks are bulwarks of clay.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Be still, let me be: I will speak\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then upon me come what may.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will take my flesh in my teeth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will put my life in my hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}See! He slays me, I cannot endure;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But my ways will I defend to His face:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And this, also, shall be my salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That a hypocrite dare not approach Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Hear now my speech with attention,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As I declare in your ears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Attend as I set forth my case;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I know that the right is with me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And if any disputeth against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then I would be silent and die.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But two things alone do not unto me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then I will not hide from Thy face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Lift the weight of Thy hand from off me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And let not Thy terrors appal me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then call Thou, and I will answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or let me speak, and answer Thou me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}How great is my guilt and transgressions?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Acquaint me with my sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}O why dost Thou hide Thy face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And count me as Thine enemy?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Wilt Thou harass a leaf that is tossed?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Wilt Thou chase the withered stubble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}That Thou passest a judgment so bitter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Entailing upon me the sins of my youth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Thou dost fasten a block on my feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And set watch over all my ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Round my roots Thou cuttest a line,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Setting bounds tha they may not pass;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}While man doth waste with decay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Like a garment devoured of the moth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Man that is born of a woman
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Is of few days and filled with trouble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He comes forth like a flower and he withers;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He flees like a shadow and stays not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On such dost Thou open Thine eyes?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And him wouldst Thou bring to Thy judgment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Who can bring from the unclean the clean?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Not one is free from sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5a}Seeing, then, that his days are decreed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5b}And the tale of his months is with Thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Look away, and let him have peace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To enjoy like a hireling his day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For hope there may be for a tree:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Though cut down, it may sprout once again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the shoots there from need to fail.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Though its root in the earth wax old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And its stem be dead in the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It may bud at the scent of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And put forth boughs like a plant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But the strong man dies and lies prostrate;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Man breathes his last and where is he?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Like the floods of a vanished sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like a river dry and withered\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12b}Till the heavens be no more, he awakes not,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12c}Nor ever is roused from his sleep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}O wouldst Thou but hide me in Sheol
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Out of sight, till Thine anger be past,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And then call me to mind in Thine own set time!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If a dead man may live once again,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I could wait all the days of my warfare
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Until my release shoud come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Thou shouldst call, and I would answer:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou wouldst year for the work of Thy hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But now Thou countest my steps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And passest not over my sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My transgressions is sealed in a bag;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou hast fastened secure mine iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But the very hills crumble to pieces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The rocks are moved out of their place;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Water wears stone to dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The floods wash the soil away:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
So the hope of man Thou destroyest;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12a}He lieth, to rise up no more.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Thou dost worst him for ever; he passeth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Dismissed \uc1\u8211* with his face how changed!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Honour comes to his sons, but he knows not:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or shame, but he doth not perceive it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the flesh upon him feels pain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the soul within him is sorrowful.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 ACT II

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Eliphaz\uc1\u8217*s Appeal to the Unadulterated Doctrine of the Past

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Would a wise man pour forth windy answers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or fill with the east wind his breast?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Would he reason with profitless words
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And with speech that is all unavailing?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}See! thou art destroying religion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Disturbing devout contemplation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Thy guilt instructeth thy mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Thine own mouth condems thee \uc1\u8211* not I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And thine own lips are witness against thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Wast thou the first man to be born?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Wast thou fashioned before the hills?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Wast thou one of the heavenly council?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Was wisdom revealed unto thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What knowest thou that we know not?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
What insight is thine and not ours?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}With us are the grey and the aged,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
More mighty in years than thy father.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Dost thou spurn the divine consolations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The word that dealt with thee so gently?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}How fierce the emotions that sweep thee!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And how thou flashest thine eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}As thou turnest thy breath against God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Into words from thy rebel lips!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}What is man that he should be clean,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or just \uc1\u8211* one of woman born?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}See! He putteth no trust in His saints,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the heavens are not clean in His sight:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}How much less one abhorrent and tainted\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
A man that drinks evil like water!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Now listen to what I will show thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The thing I have seen I will tell\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Even tales that were told by the wise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And not hidden from them by their fathers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Who had the land all to themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When no stranger had yet come among them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}All his days is the wicked in pain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
All the years for the tyrant appointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}In his ears is the sound of terrors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In peace comes the spoiler upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He cannot escape from the darkness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And he is reserved for the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Appointed as food for the vulture\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He knows that his doom is at hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The day of darkness appals him;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24a}Constraint and distress overpower him;
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For he stretched out his hand against God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Played the warrior against the Almighty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Running against Him stiff-necked
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With the thick of the boss of his bucklers,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24b}Like a king prepared for the onset.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He covered his face with his fat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He set thick folds of flesh on his loins;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And he dwelt in desolate cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In houses that none should inhabit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
What he has won, others shall capture,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}His substance shall not endure.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
On the earth he shall cast no shadow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30b}The fierce heat shall wither his branches,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30c}His fruit shall the wind whirl away.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Let him not trust his plant when it shoots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For the branch thereof shall be vanity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}It shall wither before its time,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or ever its fronds become green.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}His grapes he shall shed like the vine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And cast off like the olive his blossom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}For a barren tribe are the godless;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Tents of bribery the fire shall consume.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Big with mischief, they bring forth sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And their belly matures with deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Cry to the Witness in Heaven

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Many things such as these have I heard:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Ye are wearisome comforters \uc1\u8211* all of you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Shall windy words have an end?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
What is it that provokes thee to answer?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I, too, could speak like you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Were your soul in my soul\uc1\u8217*s stead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I could weave words together about you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And shake my head at you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I could strengthen you with my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And encourage you with lip-comfort.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}To speak is no check to my pain;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To keep silence \uc1\u8211* that easeth me nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But now He hath wearied and dazed me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My misery seizes upon me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It rises for witness against me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My grief testifies to my face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}In His wrath He hath flung me down torn;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He hath gnashed upon me with His teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My foes whet their eyes upon me;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}With open mouth they gape.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They insult me with blows on the cheek,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Coming on in their masses against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}To knaves God has given me up;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Into wicked hands He has hurled me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I was happy, when He took and shattered me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Grasped my neck, and then dashed me in pieces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He set me up for His target;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On all sides His archers beset me.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He cleaves through my reins unrelenting;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He pours out my gall on the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}One breach after another He makes on me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Rushing at me like a warrior.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Sackcloth I sewed on my skin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my horn I have laid in the dust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}My face is red with weeping,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And over mine eye-lids is darkness\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Though wrong there is none in my hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And though my prayer be pure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}O earth! cover not my blood;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
No rest let there be to my crying.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Behold, in heaven is my Witness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And I have a Sponsor on high.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My friends pour their scorn upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But my tear-stained eyes look unto God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}That He plead for a man with God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And for son of man with his Friend.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For when but a few years come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I shall go whence I shall not return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}His anger hath ruined my days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And for me is left nought but the grave.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Delusion is surely my portion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
On bitterness tarries mine eye.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Lay a pledge for me \uc1\u8211* Thou with Thyself:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For who else would strike hands with me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For their heart Thou hast hidden from wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And therefore Thou wilt not exalt them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}One inviteth his friends to a feast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
While the eyes of his children are failing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Thou has made me the by-word of nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They look upon me as a monster.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Mine eye is grown dim for vexation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My members are all as a shadow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}My days pass away without hope;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The desires of my heart are extinguished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The night I turn into day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the light is before me as darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If I hope, then the grave is my home,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my couch I have spread in the darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I call to the pit, "My mother";
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And unto the worm, "My sister."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Where then were that "hope" of mine?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my happiness who can espy?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Will it go with me down to the grave?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Shall we sink to the dust together?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Bildad\uc1\u8217*s Picture of the Sure and Terrible Doom of the Wicked

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}Then answered Bildad the Shuhite and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When with thou end thy words?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Now consider, and we shall speak.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Why are we counted as breasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And deemed by thee to be dullards?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}Honest men thrill with horror at this:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}A pure man is roused by such godlessness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But the righteous holds on his way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the man of clean hands waxes stronger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10a}But turn thee hither and come,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}Thou that tearest thyself in thine anger.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For thy sake shall earth be made desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or rock be moved out of its place?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Nay, the light of the wicked is quenced,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the flame of his fire shall not shine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The light in his tent shall be dark,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the lamp o\uc1\u8217*er his head shall go out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}His great swinging strides become shortened;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His own counsel maketh him stumble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}His foot is thrust into a net,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So that over the net-work ge sprawleth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}A snare shall take hold of his heel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And a trap shall close tightly upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}A noose lies concealed on the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And a trap on his path doth await him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On all sides are terrors appalling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Pursuing him close at his heels.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For him shall misfortune be hungry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Disaster is ready to throw him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The pestilence gnaws at his skin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the firstborn of death at his members.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then, dragged from his tent in despair,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He is marched to the King of Terrors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}His house shall be haunted by ghosts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
On his homestead shall brimstone be scattered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}His roots shall be dried up beneath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And above shall his branches be withered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}From earth shall his memory perish;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
No name shall be his on the streets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}From the light he is thrust into darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And chased right out of the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Of his folk, neither kith nor kin\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Where he sojourned, not one is left.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The west is appalled at his doom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the east is stricken with horror.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yea, such are the homes of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Of those who care nothing for God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Sublime Faith in his Future Vindication

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How long will ye vex my soul
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And crush me to pieces with words?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}These ten times ye have put me to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And set upon me unabashedly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Well, be it that I have erred\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Mine error abides with myself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Or would ye be haughty to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And insult me with your reproaches?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Know, then, it is God that hath wronged me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And compassed me round with His net.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Behold! I cry "Wrong" \uc1\u8211* but no answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I call \uc1\u8211* but justice is none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}My way He hath fenced round impassably,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Darkness He sets on my path.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He hath stripped my glory from off me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And taken the crown from my head.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He hath torn me clean down \uc1\u8211* I am gone:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He hath plucked up my hope like a tree.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He hath kindled His anger against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And counted me one of His enenmies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On come His troops together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They throw up a rampart against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}My brethren are gone far from me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My friends have estranged themselves from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}My neighbours have ceased to acknowledge me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Guests of my house have forgotten me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Maids of mine count me a stranger;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
A foreigner am I in their sight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To my servant I call, but he answers not,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Till with my mouth I entreat him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My breath is strange to my wife,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my stench to mine own very children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yea, even young boys despise me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And mock me when I try to rise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}All mine intimate friends abhor me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The man whom I love turns against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My skin clings to my bones;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I escape with my flesh in my teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Have pity, have pity, my friends;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For the hand of God hath touched me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Why do ye persecute me like \uc1\u8211* God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And devour my flesh insatiably?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}O that my words were now written,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That they were inscribed in a book,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}That with iron pen and with lead
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
On a rock they were graven for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I know that there liveth a Champion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who will one day stand over my dust;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Yea, Another shall rise as My Witness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And, as Sponsor, shall I behold \uc1\u8211* God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Whom mine eyes shall behold, and no stranger\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My heart is faint in my bosom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But if ye are determined to hunt me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And in me find the root of the matter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then dread ye the sword for yourselves;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For wrath shall destroy the ungodly.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Zophar\uc1\u8217*s Warning and Innuendo that Heaven and
Earth have already Witnessed against Job
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Nay, not so do my thoughts make answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And therefore my heart is uproused.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Must I hear thine insulting reproof,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
While mere breath without sense is thine answer?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Knowest thou not this from of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
From the time there were men on the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}That the song of the wicked is short,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the hypocrite\uc1\u8217*s joy but a moment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Though his majesty mount on the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his head reach unto the clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He shall utterly perish like dung;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Those that knew him shall ask, "Where is he?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Like a dream he shall fly beyond finding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Dispelled like a vision of night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}No more shall the eye see that saw him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His place shall behold him no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}His sons shall be crushed by privation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His wealth shall his children restore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The vigour of youth filled his bones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But within him it shall lie in the dust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Though evil be sweet in his mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As he keeps it hid under his tongue;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Though he spare it and let it not go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But still holdeth it back in his mouth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet his food in his stomach is turned;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
It is poison of asps within him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The wealth that he swallowed he vomits;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
God easteth it forth from his belly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The poison of asps he has sucked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the tongue of the viper shall slay him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}No rivers of oil shall he see,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
No torrents of honey and butter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}His increasing gain brings him no gladness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His traffickling yields him no joy;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For he crushed down the gains of the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And he plundered the house that he built not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}His treasures have brought him no peace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his precious things cannot deliver.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And since none has escaped his devouring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His own fortune shall not endure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Brought to straits in the fullness of plenty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The fell force of trouble assails him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He shall let loose His hot wrath against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And terrors shall rain down upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}As he flees from the weapon of iron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And bronze bow pierces him through.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}The missle comes out at his back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the glittering point from his gall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Terrors keep coming upon him;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Deep darkness is stored up for him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A mysterious fire shall devour him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And ravage those left in his tent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The heavens shall reveal his guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the earth shalll rise up against him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}His house shall be swept by destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Accursed in the day of His wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Such the wicked man\uc1\u8217*s portion from God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
God\uc1\u8217*s heritage unto the rebel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Fierce Indicment of the Existing Order

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hear now my word with attention:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Your consolation be this.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Suffer me, for I would speak also:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then, when I have spoken, mock on.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Is it man that I would complain of?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And why should I not be impatient?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now listen to me; and, in horror,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Lay ye your hand on your mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When I think of it, I am confounded,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And shuddering seizeth my flesh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Why are wicked men suffered to live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To grow old and wax mighty in power?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their seed is established before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their offspring in sight of their eyes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Their homes are strangers to terror;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
No rod of God is on them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Their bull doth unfailingly gender,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their cow never loses her calf.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Like a flock they send their young children;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their boys and their girls dance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They sing to the timbrel and lyre;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
At the sound of the pipe they make merry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They finish their days in prosperity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And go down to Sheol in peace\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Though they said unto God, "O leave us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
We desire not to know Thy ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Why should we serve the Almighty?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And what is the good of prayer?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}See! their fortune is in their own hand:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nought He cares for the schemes of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}How oft is the lamp of the wicked put out?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How oft does disaster assail them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or the pains of His anger lay hold of them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}How often are they as as the straw before wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or like chaff that is stolen by the storm?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}"God stores up his guilt for his children."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
("Nay," I reply); "let Him punish
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The man himself, that he feel it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Let his own eyes behold his disaster,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Let him drink the wrath of Almighty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For what doth he care for his house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When his own tale of months is cut short?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Will any teach knowledge to God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Seeing He judgeth (angels) on high?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}One dies with his strength unimpaired,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the heyday of ease and prosperity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Filled are his buckets with milk;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His bones at the marrow are moistened.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And one dies with soul embittered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With never a taste of good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}In the dust they lie down together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The worm covers them both.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 Behold!}I know your Thoughts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And your cruel devices against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}In askng, "Where lives now the tyrant?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Where now doth the godless dwell?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Have ye never asked those that travel?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Have ye never noted their proofs
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}That the wicked is kept from disaster,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Is saved in the day of wrath?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Who tells him his way to his face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or requites him for what he hath done?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And yet he is borne to the grave,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And men keep watch over his tomb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Sweet for him are the clods of the valley,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And after him all men draw.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Why then offer your idle comfort?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Your answers leave nothing but falsehood
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 ACT III

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Eliphaz\uc1\u8217*s Cruel and Baseless Charges

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Can a man bring profit to God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nay, the wise man but profits himself
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Doth Almighty God care for thy righteousness?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Hath He gain from thy blameless ways?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For thy piety would He chastise thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or enter with thee into judgment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Is not thy wickedness great?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Are not thine iniquities endless?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Thou hast wrongly taken pledge of thy brother,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And stripped from the naked their clothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}No water thou gavest the weary,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And bread thou hast held from the hungry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The land was for him that was strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the man of rank made it his own.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thou has sent widows empty away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Orphan arms thou hast broken in pieces:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And therfore are snares round about thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And fear on a sudden confounds thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Thy light is vanished in darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And floods of waters are over thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Is not God in the heights of heaven?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the tops of the high stars He seeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yet thou sayest, "What doth God know?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Can He judge aright through the thick darkness?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The clouds hide Him, so that He sees not;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He walketh the vault of the heavens."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Wilt thou keep to the ancient way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Which men of sin have trodden,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Who untimely were snatched away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
While the ground beneath ran like a stream?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The righteous rejoiced at the sight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the innocent laughed them to scorn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}"Ah! surely our foes are cut off,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the remnant devoured by the fire."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Now be friendly with Him and submissive,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For this is the way to happiness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Acccept from His mouth instruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And lay up His words in thy heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}If thou humbly turn to Almighty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And put away sin from thy tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And lay in the dust thy treasure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Ophir gold among stones of the brook,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}That Almighty become thy treasure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And His instruction thy silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then Almighty shall be thy delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou shalt lift up thy face unto God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He will hearken unto thy petition,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And so shalt thou pay thy vows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The thing thou decreest shall stand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And light shall shine on thy ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For He humbles the high and the proud;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But whose eyes are lowly He saveth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The innocent man He delivers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And saves for this cleanness of hands.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Second Sustained Indictment of the Existing Order

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}The Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This day also my plaint must be bitter;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His hand on my groaning lies heavy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}O that I knew where to find Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That I might come unto His throne,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And set forth my cause before Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With arguments filling my mouth!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I would know with what words He would answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And understand what He would say to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Would He use His great power in the contest?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nay, He would give heed unto me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}There the upright might argue with Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my right I should rescue for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Behold, I go east, but He is not:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And west, but I cannot perceive Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Seek on the north, but in vain:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I turn south, but I cannot behold Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But He knoweth the way that is mine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I would come forth as gold, should He try me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}My foot hath held fast to His steps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And His way have I kept without swerving.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Not once have I strayed from His precepts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His words have I hid in my bosom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But when He hath resolved \uc1\u8211* who can turn Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And what He desireth, He doeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For this cause His presence confounds me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The thought of Him fills me with terror;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For God hath weakened my heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And Almighty confounded me clean.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I am utterly lost in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And gloom enwrappeth my face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}Why doth God not fix seasons for judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And His friends never see His (great) day?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The wicked remove the landmarks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They plunder the flock with the shepherd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They drive off the ass of the fatherless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Take the ox of the widow in pledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The poor they turn out of the way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the needy must huddle together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}See! like the wild asss in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They roam forth in search of prey;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their children eat bread of the jungle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They reap the fields in the night-time;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They punder the vines of the wealthy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All night they lie bare, without clothing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With nothing to keep out of the cold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They are wet with the showers of the hills,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the rocks they embrace for a shelter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The fatherless they tear from the breast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the babe of the poor take in pledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They go about bare, without clothing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And, hungry, they pilfer the sheaves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They press out the oil \uc1\u8217*twixt the olive-rows;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The wine-vats they tread and then drain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}From cities and homes they are driven;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their little ones cry out for hunger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But God takes no heed of the wrong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There are those who rebel against light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who recognise not His ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But refuse to abide in His paths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In the evening the murderer rises
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To butcher the poor and the needy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The thief stalks abroad in the night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}With face muffed up in a veil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The adulterer watches for twilight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Assured that no eye can behold him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In the darkness they break into houses;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They shut themselves up in the day-time;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For all of them hate the light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Familiar with gloomy ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They seek for themselves the deep darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And swiftly they glide on the waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His portion of land shall be cursed,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Consumed by the drought and the heat,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And flooded away by snow-water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The streets of his place shall forget him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Shall think of his greatness no more:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like a dead tree shall he be uprooted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For he did not good to the widow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
No pity he showed to her babe;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And his power swept the helpless away.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Vengeance falls: he expects not to live,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He is hurled beyond hope of recovery;
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The tormentor is on his way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}His greatness is brief \uc1\u8211* he is gone;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like the mallow he bends, he shrivels\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Cut down like the top ears of corn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And if not, who will prove me a liar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And reduce mine indictment to nothing?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Bildad\uc1\u8217*s Declaration of God\uc1\u8217*s Wisdom and Power

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}How well thou hast aided the weak
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And supported the arm of the strengtless!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}How well thou hast conselled the foolish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And shown thine abundance of wisdom!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Who inspired thee to utter such words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And whose spirit is it that comes forth from thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}Dominion and fear are with Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}On His high places He maketh peace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}His hosts \uc1\u8211* are they not beyond counting?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Whom doth not His ambush surprise?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}How can man then be just before God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How can one born of woman be pure?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}See! the moon herself is not clear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the stars are not pure in His sight:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}How much less is man \uc1\u8211* a mere maggot;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the on of man \uc1\u8211* but a worm!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}Before Him in pain writhe the giants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Whose home is beneath the waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Sheol is naked before Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Uncovered lieth Abaddon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He stretcheth the North o\uc1\u8217*er the void,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And He hangeth the earth over nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In His thick clouds He tieth the waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Yet the clouds are not torn with the weight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He closeth the face of His throne,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And over it spreadeth His cloud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}A circle He drew on the deep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To the confines of light and of darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The pillars of heaven fell a-rocking,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Astonished at His rebuke.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}By His power He stirred up the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
By His wisdom He smote clean through Rahab.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}His breath made the heavens fair;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His hand pierced the serpent that fleeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}See! these are the fringe of His ways;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Yea, \uc1\u8217*tis only whisper we hear:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who can tell how mighty His thunder?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Last Clash \uc1\u8211* Between Job and Zophar

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Job

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 27}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}As God Almighty liveth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who hath wronged and embittered my soul\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For within me my life is yet whole,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the spirit of God in my nostrils\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I swear that my lips speak no falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My tongue doth not utter deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God forbid I shoud grant ye were right;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will cling to mine innocence till I die.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I maintain to the end I am guiltless;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Not an hour of my life do I blush for.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Zophar

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Perish my foe like the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Mine enemy as the unrighteous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For what is the hope of the godless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When God requireth his soul?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Will God give ear to his cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the day when distress comes upon him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Will Almighty be then his delight?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When he calleth, will God be entreated?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will teach you how God wields His arm,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And not hide the Almighty\uc1\u8217*s behaviour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Ye have all with your own eyes seen it:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Wherefore, then, this idle folly?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The wicked man\uc1\u8217*s portion from God is this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the lot the Almighty bestows on the tyrant:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If his children grow up, the sword claims them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His offspring are stinted for bread.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}By death shall his remnant be buried,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their widows shall make no lament.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Though silver he heap up like dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And prepare (costly) raiment like clay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Yet the just shall put on what he stored,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the silver shall fall to the innocent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Like a spider\uc1\u8217*s the house which he builded,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like booth which the vine-keeper maketh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He lieth down rich, but he wakes not;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He openeth his eyes, and he is not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He is caught in a flood of terrors;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the night he is stolen by a tempest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The east wind bears him away;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
It sweepeth him out of his place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He hurleth at him without mercy;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Fain would he escape from His hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}His hands He clappeth at him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And He hisseth at him from His place.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Mystery of the Divine Wisdom

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 (As for Wisdom-whence cometh she?
 Understanding-where hath she her home?){\cf1\f1\fs22 28 } 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For a mine there is for the silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And a place where the gold is refined.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Iron is taken from dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And copper is smelted from stone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Man explores the dark to its limits,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Seeks stones fromthe blackest gloom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He breaketh a shaft through the ground;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Forgotten, they hang without foothold;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They swing to and fro far from men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}From the surface of earth cometh bread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
While, beneath, it is raked as by fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Her stones are the home of the sapphire;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The dust thereof is gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The pathway is strange to the vulture,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Unseen by the eye of the hawk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}By the sons of pride untrodden,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor ever by fierce lion skirted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He puts forth his hand on the rock;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
At their roots he o\uc1\u8217*erturneth the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10a}Channels he cuts in the rocks,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11a}And he bindeth the streams that they weep not.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10b}Each precious thing his eye seeth;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11b}He bringeth the secret to light.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But Wisdom \uc1\u8211* whence cometh she?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Understanding \uc1\u8211* where hath she her home?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The way to her no man knoweth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the land of the living none finds her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The deep saith, "She is not in me";
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the sea saith, "She is not in me."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}No fine gold for her can be given,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor silver be paid as her price.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Not in Ophir gold can she be valued,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In precious onyx or sapphire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Gold and clear glass are no match for her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Jewels of gold no exchange for her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Speak no of coral or crystal;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
More precious than rubies is Wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The topaz of Cush is no match for her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In pure gold she cannot be valued.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But Wisdom \uc1\u8211* whence cometh she?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Understanding \uc1\u8211* where hath she her home?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}She is hid from the eyes of all living,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Concealed from the birds of the air.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Abaddon and Death declare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"A rumour of her we have heard."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But the way to her God understandeth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And He alone knoweth her home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For He looks to the ends of the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And all things under heaven He beholds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}when He settled the weight of the wind
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And meted the waters by measure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Created a law for the rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And a path for the flash of the lightning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Even then did He see and declare her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Establish and search her out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And He said unto man, "Behold!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The fear of Me \uc1\u8211* that is Wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And turning from wrong \uc1\u8211* Understanding."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Job\uc1\u8217*s Great Defence and His Last Appeal

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Happy Past

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 29}Then Job answered and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}O to be as in months long gone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As in days when God used to keep me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When His lamp shone over my head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And I walked by His light through the darkness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}As I was in the days of mine autumn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When God protected my tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}While still the Almighty was with me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my children were round about me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When my steps were bathed in milk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the rock poured me rivers of oil!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When I went to the city gate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or took up my place in the open,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The youths, when they saw me, hid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The old men rose and stood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Princes refrained from speech,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And laid their hand on their mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The voice of the nobles was hushed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And their tongue would cleave to their palate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I was blessed by the ear that heard me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The eye bore me witness that saw me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For I rescued the poor when he cried,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The fatherless and the helpless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The wretched gave me their blessing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The widow\uc1\u8217*s heart I made sing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I put on the garment of righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
A robe and a turban of justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Eyes was I to the blind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Feet to the lame was I;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}A father was I to the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And I searched out the cause of the stranger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I shattered the jaws of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And hurled the prey from his teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So I thought, "I shall die with my nest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As the sand my days shall be many.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}My root is spread out to the waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
All night lies the dew on my branches.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Within me my glory is fresh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my bow is renewed in my hand."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They hearkened to me and they waited,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Kept silence till I should give counsel;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After I spoke, they spake not again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My speech fell like rain-drops upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They waited for me as for rain\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Open-mouthed, as for latter rain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When I smiled upon them, they were strengthened;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The light of my face cheered the sorrowing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I chose out their way and sat chief,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Enthroned like a king in his army.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Awful Present

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 30}But now am I become their song,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Yea, I am a by-word among them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In horror they stand far aloof,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And they spare not to spit at the sight of me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He hath slackened my bow-string, and humbled me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Flung down my banner before me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Against me His hosts stand up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They raise deadly ramparts against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}My path they tear up clean,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My tracks they destroy altogether.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His Archers ring me around,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As through a wide breach they come in,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Rolling on in the midst of the ruin.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Terrors are turned upon me;
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My weal is the sport of the winds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my welfare is passed like a cloud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And now is my soul poured out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The terrors of misery seize me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The night boreth into my bones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the pains that gnaw never slumber,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}From sore wasting my garments is shrunk;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
It clingeth to me like my vest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}(God) hath plunged me into the mire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So that I am like dust and ashes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I cry, but Thou givest no answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou standest and heedest me not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Cruel to me art Thou turned;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With the might of Thy hand Thou dost scourge me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Thou settest me to ride on the wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And I melt in the roar of the storm.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For I know Thou wilt bring me to death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To the house where all living assemble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yet sinking men stretch out their hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And cry for help as they perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He whose days are hard \uc1\u8211* does he weep not?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Is the soul of the needy not grieved?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For instead of the good I had hoped for came evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Instead of the light I waited came darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}My heart is hot and restless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And misery daily confronts me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I got with my sorrow uncomforted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Standing where jackals are gathered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Brother am I to the wolves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And of ostriches the companion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}All backened my skin peels from off me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My bones are burned with the heat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}So my lyre is turned into mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My pipe to the voice of lament.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Defence and Final Appeal

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 31}A tyrst I made with mine eyes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To give no heed unto folly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For how doth the high God reward it\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Almighty in heaven requite it?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Is not for the wicked misfortune\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Disaster for workers of wrong?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Doth He not see my ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And number my steps every one?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If ever I walked with falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or my foot hath made haste unto fraud\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Let God only weigh wish just balance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Mine innocence He must acknowledge\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If my step ever swerved from the way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or my heart hath gone after mine eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or spot hath cleaved to my hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then what I sow may others enjoy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And all produce of mine be uprooted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If my heart hath been lured by a woman,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
If I lurked at my neighbour\uc1\u8217*s door,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}May my own wife grind to another,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And let others bow down upon her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For that were an infamous crime,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
An iniquity calling for judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}A fire that devours to Abaddon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And would all mine increase consume.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Never spurned I the cause of my servant\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Of man or of maid \uc1\u8211* when we strove.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Else what should I do, when God rose?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When He visited, what should I answer?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Did not He that made me make him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Did not One fashion us in the womb?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Ne\uc1\u8217*er denied I the wish of the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor brought grief to the eyes of the widow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Never ate I my morsel alone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Without sharing thereof with the orphan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For father-like, He brought me up from my youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And my Guide has He been from my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Never saw I one naked and perishing\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Needy, with nothing to cover him\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But I warmed him with fleece from my lambs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his loins gave me their blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}If, beacause I saw help in the gate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I have ever set hand on the innocent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Let my shoulder fall from its blade,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And mine arm from the socketh be broken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The terrors of God would assail me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Before whose approach I were powerless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Never set I my trust upon gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor called the fine gold my confidence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Mine abundant wealth never elated me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor all that my hands had gotten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Never, watching the shining lights,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or the moon as she walked in her splendour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Did my heart feel their subtle allurement,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or my hand throw a kiss to my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}This, too, were a crime for the judges,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For to God above I had lied:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Ne\uc1\u8217*er rejoiced I at enemy\uc1\u8217*s fall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor triumphed when evil befel him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Not suffered my mouth to sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
By demanding his life in a curse.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The men of my tent will declare
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
None has ever been stinted of food.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Not a stranger e\uc1\u8217*er lodged in the street,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For I opened my doors to the wayfarer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}No fear of the crowd ever led me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To hide my sin among men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}No contempt of the clans ever scared me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To stay behind closed doors in silence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}O for One who would listen to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Behold! there is my cross!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Let Almighty God give me His answer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O would that I had the indicment
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Mine Adversary hath written!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For, bearing it high on my shoulder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And winding it round like a crown,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Every step of my life I would tell Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like a prince I would enter His presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}If my land ever cried out against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Her furrows all weeping together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}If her strength I have drained without cost,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or have poured out the life of her owner;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Let thorns take the place of wheat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And foul-smelling weeds \uc1\u8211* of barley.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40c}The words of Job are ended.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Elihu\uc1\u8217*s Interpretation of Suffering

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 32}Now these three men ceased answering Job,because he was righteous in his own eyes. Then{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the anger of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite,of the family of Ram, was kindled; against Jobwas his anger kindled, because he had made himself{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}out to be more righteous than God. But his angerwas kindled against his three friends as well,because they had condemned Job without finding{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}any answer. Now, as they were older, Elihu had{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}waited while they were speaking with Job; but,on seeing that the three men had no answer to offer,Elihu\uc1\u8217*s anger was kindled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then Elihu the son of Barachel the Buziteanswered and said:I am but young in years,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
While ye are aged men:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
So I was timid, and feared
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To set my opinion before you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I felt that days ought to speak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And that years gave the right to teach wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But the spririt enlighteneth men,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Almighty inspires then with insight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It is not the old men that are wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor the aged that understand truth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And so, pray, listen to me\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I, too, would set forth my opinion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11a}I waited what you had to say,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11b}I lent mine ear to your reasons;
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12a}Yea, I gave heed unto you,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11c}While ye searched out what to say.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12b}But see! none brought conviction to Job,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12c}Not a man of you answered his words.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Say not "Here wer have come upon wisdom;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8217*Tis God must confound him, not man."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He hath not yet debated with me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor will I give him answers like yours.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Panic-stricken they answer no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Words have floated away from them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Must I wait because they are silent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Stand still, and answer no more?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Nay, but I, too, will answer my share;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I, too, will set forth my opinion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For filled with words am I;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The breath in my body distress me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Like wine without vent is my belly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like new wine-skins ready to burst.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I must speak and so find me relief;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I must open my lips and make answer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I would show my favour to none,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And give flattering titles to no man.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Of flattery I know nothing\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Else soon would my Maker remove me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 33}But listen, Job, pray, to my words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And give ear unto all that I say.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Behold! I have opened my mouth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My tongue in my palate hath spoken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}MY heart poureth forth words of knowledge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Unfeigned is the speech of my lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The spirit of God hath created me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
My life is the breath of Almighty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then answer me this, if thou canst:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Stand up and debate with me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}See! I am in God\uc1\u8217*s sight as thou;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I, too, was fashioned to clay.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}See! no terrors of mine need appal thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor shall my hand lie heavy upon thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Thou hast certainly said in my hearing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thy voice I heard thus maintaining:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}"Pure and sinless am I;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I am clean, there is no guilt in me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But He findeth pretexts against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He counteth me as His foe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He setteth my feet in the stocks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Keepeth watch over all my ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Behold! when I cry, comes no answer:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
God hideth Himself from men."
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God speaks to Men through Dreams and Visions

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Now why dost thou plead against Him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That He giveth thy words no answer?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For God hath one manner of speech,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Yea two \uc1\u8211* and He doth not revoke it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}In a dream, in a vision of night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"When deep sleep falleth on men,"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In slumbers upon the bed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then He opens the ears of men,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And sendeth them fearful warnings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}To turn men aside from wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And to bring human pride to an end\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}To keep back man\uc1\u8217*s soul from the pit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his life from descending to Sheol.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God speaks to Men through Pain and Sickness

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Or on bed of pain he is chastened,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And all his bones are benumbed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}His soul has a loathing of bread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the daintiest food he abhorreth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}His flesh is lean and wasted;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His bones are all but bare.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}His soul draweth nigh to the pit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his life to the angels of death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then over him there is an angel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Interpreter, one of a thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Who expounds unto man his chastisement,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Takes pity on him and says:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Let him not go down to the pit:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I have found (for his soul) a ransom."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then his flesh becomes fresher than child\uc1\u8217*s,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He returns to the days of his youth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He prays unto God with acceptance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He looks on His face with joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Tells the story of his salvation,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And sings before men this song:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
"I have sinned and perverted the right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Yet He hath not requited my sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}He hath ransomed my soul from the pit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That alive I behold the light."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}See! all these things God doeth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Twice, yea thrice, with a man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}To bring back his soul from the pit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With the light of life\uc1\u8217*s sunshine upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Be attentive, Job, listen to me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Be thou silent, and I will speak.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}If aught thou canst say, then answer me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Speak, for my wish is to clear thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But if not, listen thou unto me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Be silent, while I teach thee wisdom.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 34}Then Elihu went on:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Listen, ye wise, to my words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And give ear to me, ye that have knowledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For the ear is the tester of words
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As the palate the taster of food.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let us choose for ourselves what is good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Recognise by ourselves what is good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For Job claimeth to be in the right:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
"God," he says, "hath deprived me of justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Though right, I am counted a liar;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And though sinless, He wounds me past healing."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Where is the man like Job
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That drinketh up scorning like water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}That leagues with the workers of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And that walketh with wicked men?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For he saith that a mn hath no profit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
From being the friend of God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God watches over the Moral Order

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So, ye men of intelligence, listen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Far be it from God to do evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And from the Almighty to err.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For the work of each man He requiteth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He bringeth his way back upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}God assuredly cannot do wrong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Almighty would not pervert justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Who entrusted the earth to His charge?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And who watcheth over the universe?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If He should recall His spirit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And gather His breath to Himself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All flesh together would perish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And man would return to the dust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If thou art wise, listen to this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And give ear to the sound of my words.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Could One rule to whom justice were odious?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Condemn\uc1\u8217*st thou the Just and the Mighty One,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Who saith to a king, "Thou villain!"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To nobles, "Ye infamous men!"\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Who showeth no favour to princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Regardeth not rich more than poor?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For the work of His hands are they all:
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In a moment they die \uc1\u8211* at midnight.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The rich are convulsed, they pass:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He mysteriously removeth the mighty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For His eyes are over man\uc1\u8217*s ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Every one of his steps He beholdeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}No darkness is there and no gloom
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Where the workers of wrong may be hidden.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}No time doth he set for man
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To appear before God in judgment:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}He shatters the strong without trial,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And others He sets in their place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For He giveth heed to their works;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the night He doth overturn them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Beneath their crimes they are crushed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He smites them in presence of witnesses;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For they turned from following Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And they gave no heed to His ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}so the crushed were driven to cry to Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the call of the wretched He heard.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}But if He remain silent, who then can condemn Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
If He hide His face, who can bring Him to task?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yet He watches o\uc1\u8217*er nations and men,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}That none reigns who would wrong the people.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Say to God, "I have borne my sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will not offend any more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Now I see it: O teach me Thyself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Have I sinned? I will do so no more."
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Must He recompense after thy wishes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That thou hast rejected (His ways)?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8217*Tis for thee to decide \uc1\u8211* not for me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Then utter the thing that thou knowest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Men of intellect will admit\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Men of wisdom who listen to me\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}That Job hath not spoken with knowledge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His words are not marked by insight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}O that Job might be tried to the end
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For the wickedness of his answers!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For he addeth rebellion to sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And multiples words against God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 35}Then Elihu went on:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Thinkest thou this to be just,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Dost thou call it they right before God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}To ask, "What advantage is mine?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
What the better am I, if I sin not?"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Well, I will give thee an answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And thy three friends as well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Look to the heavens and see,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And observe the clouds high overhead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}what effect hath thy sin upon Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
What cares He for thy many transgressions?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}What gain comes to Him from thy righteousness?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
What receives He from thy hand?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8217*Tis to men like thyself thy sin matters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8217*Tis mortals thy righteousness touches.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Under sore oppression men cry
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For help from the arm of the tyrant;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But none saith, "Where is God my Creator?"\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Giver of songs in the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Who grants us more knowledge than beasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And more wisdom than birds of the air.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then they cry, but receive no answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Because of their impious pride.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For to idle cries God will not listen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor will the Almighty regard them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And when He seems not to regard thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Be still and wait patiently for Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But now that His wrath doth not punish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And sin He not greatly regardeth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Job opens his mouth thus idly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And poureth forth words without knowledge.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God\uc1\u8217*s Disciplinary Methods Illustrated in History

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 36}Then Elihu continued:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Wait, I pray, but a while; I will show thee:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I have yet to say somewhat for God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}With knowledge fetched from afar
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will justify my Creator.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For truly my words are no lie;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
One in knowledge complete stands before thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Behold, God spurneth the stubborn,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The wicked He spareth not:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But He granteth the rights of the wretched,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Withdraws not their due from the just.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It has happened to kings on the throne,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
seated in pride and glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}That prisoners in chains they became,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Held fast in the cords of misery:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then He set forth before them their doings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Their proud and rebellious behaviour;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He opened their ears to instruction
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And bade them turn back from sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If they hearken and do Him homage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They finish their days in prosperity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But if stubborn, they pass to Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They die without coming to knowledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For, godless at heart, they grow sullen;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They cry not for help when He binds them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They die in the days of their youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like sodomites they perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The sufferer He saveth through sufferings;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Adversity opens his ear.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But thou hast been lured by thy freedom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
By ease at the jaws of distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
By the fat on thy well-filled table,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the absence of trouble to haunt thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The full fate of the wicked is thine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Thou art held in the grasp of His judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Let not chastisement make thee resentful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor let the high ransom deflect thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Wouldst thou marshall thy plaint against Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And all the resource of thy might?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Let not folly beguile thee to rival
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The man who doth think himself wise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Beware, and incline not to sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor make choice of sin rather than suffering.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God\uc1\u8217*s Marvellous Ways in Nature

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}See! God by His power doeth loftily\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who is a teacher like Him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Who hath enjoined Him His way?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or who hath said, "Thou doest wrongly"?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Remember to magnify Him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For His work, whereof men have sung.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}All men look with pleasure thereon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Though man seeth it but from afar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Behold! God is great beyond knowledge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The tale of His years beyond search.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For He draweth up drops from the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Which He poureth in rain from His Vapour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Wherewith, as the clouds distil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They drop down in showers upon men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Who can tell how the clouds are spread out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How He thunders from His pavilion?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}He spreadeth His vapour around Him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He covers the tops of the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Therewith He sustaineth the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And food in abundance He giveth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He wrappeth His hands in the lightning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And biddeth it fly to its mark.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}His thunder announces His coming;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His anger is kindled at wrong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 37}At this doth thy heart not tremble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And leap right out of its place?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hark, hark to His voice tempestuous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To the roar that goes forth from His mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8217*Neath the whole sky He letteth it loose,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And His flash to the fringe of the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In the wake of it roareth His voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With His voice majestic He thunders;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Nor holds He the lightnings back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Whensoever His voice is heard.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God letteth us see His wonders;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Great things beyond knowledge He doeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For He saith to the snow, "Fall earthwards";
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Likewise to His strong rushing rain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He sealeth up all mankind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That His work may be known of them all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The beasts go into their lairs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And within their dens remain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The temptest comes out of its chamber,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And out of its store-house the cold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}By the breath of God ice is given,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The broad waters lie in constraint.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Yea, He ladeth the thick cloud with hail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the cloud doth scatter His lightning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This way and that is darteth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Turning about by His guidance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Doings whate\uc1\u8217*er He commands it
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Over the face of His world,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Wether for curse and correction
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or in mercy He sendeth it forth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Hearken to this, Job, stand still,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And consider the wonders of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Dost thou know how God doeth His work;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How He flashes the light of His cloud?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Dost thou know how the thick clouds are poised;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How He pours down a flood when it thunders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}What time thy garments grow hot
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
From the south wind which laps earth in silence?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Like Him canst thou spread out the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like Him canst thou spread out the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Which is strong as a molten mirror?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}How then shall we speak to Him? Tell me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For helpless are we in our darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Shall one cavil at Him when He speaketh?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or shall a man say that He errs?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Now no man can look on the light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So dazzling bright in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When the wind has passed over and cleared it,
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And radiance comes out of the north;
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But the splendour of God \uc1\u8211* how terrible!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The Almighty we cannot find out.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Powerful is He and all-righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And justice He will not pervert.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For this cause ought mortals to fear Him:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But the heart of conceit He despiseth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 ACT IV

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Answer of the Almighty

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The wonders of the Inanimate World

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 38}Then Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwindand said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}who is this, then, that darkeneth counsel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
By words that are empty of knowledge?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Gird up they loins like a man:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I would ask of thee \uc1\u8211* do thou enlighten Me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Where wast thou, when I founded the earth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Declare out of the depths of thine insight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Dost thou of know who appointed her measures,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or who stretched upon her the line?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Whereupon were her pedestal sunk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or who laid her cornerstone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When the morning-stars sang together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the sons of God shouted in chorus?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Who shut in the sea with doors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When it burst its way out of the womb\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When gave it its robe of cloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And its swaddling band of the dark cloud;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When I broke off its border for it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And set on its bars and doors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Declaring, "Thus far, but no further,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And here shall thy proud waves be stayed"?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Didst thou ever give charge to the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or appoint to the day-star her place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}To take hold of the skirts of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And to shake out the wicked from off it?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It is changed as clay under the seal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the world stands forth (bright) as a garment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Hast thou entered the springs of the ocean,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or walked in the depths of the sea?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Have the gate-ways of Death been unveiled to thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Hast thou looked on the porters of Hades?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The breadth of the earth hast thou noted?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
How great is it? Tell, if thou knowest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Which way leads to the home of the light?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And where is the place of the darkness?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Canst thou fetch it out unto its border,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or lead it back home to its house?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Thou wast born then, so doubtless thou knowest\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The tale of thy years is so great!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Hast thou entered the store-house of snow?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Hast thou looked on the guardians of hail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Which I hoard for the time of distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
for the day of assault and of battle?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Which way are the vapours divided,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That scatter on earth the cool water?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Who cleft for the torrents a channel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
A path for the flash of the lightning\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Sending rain on the desolate land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
On the uninhabited desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Thus gladdening the wilderness waste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the thirsty land clothing with verdure?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Say, hath the rain a father?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or who hath begotten the dew-drops?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Out of whose womb issued the ice?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the hoar-frost of heaven \uc1\u8211* who hath borne it?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The waters are frozen like stone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the face of the deep remains hidden.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Dost thou fasten the chain of the dog-star
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or loosen the bonds or Orion?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Dost thou bring out the stars in their season?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The Bear with her young dost thou lead?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Dost thou lay down the law to the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or establish their rule in the earth?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Dost thou lift up thy voice to the clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That abundance of waters obey thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Dost thou send on their mission the lightnings?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To thee do they say, "Here we are"?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Who hath set in the fleecy clouds wisdom?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or given to the meteor insight?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Who spreadeth the clouds out in wisdom?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who tilteth the pitchers of heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}When the dust runneth into a mass
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the clods cleave firmly together?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Wonders of the Animate World

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Dost thou hunt for the lion his prey
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or the young lions\uc1\u8217* craving appease,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}When low in their lairs they crouch,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Lying in wait in the thicket?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Who provideth at even his food,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
When his young ones cry unto God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Open-mouthed, for the meat that is lacking?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 39}Dost thou fix the birth-times of the wild goats,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or watch o\uc1\u8217*er the calving of hinds?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Dost thou number the months they fulfil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or determine the time of their bearing?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They cower and bring forth their young,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Swiftly ridding themselves of their birth-pangs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Their young one grow strong in the open,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Go forth and come back not again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Who let out the wild ass free?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Who loosened the bonds of the wild ass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Whose home I have made the steppe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the salt-land the place of his dwelling?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He laughs at the din of the city,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
No driver roars in his ears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The mountains he scours as his pasture,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And every green thing is his quest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Will the wild ox be willing to serve thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or spend the night in thy crib?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Wilt thou fasten a rope on his neck?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Will he harrow thy furrows behind thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Wilt thou trust his magnificent strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or put him in charge of thy labours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Expect him to come again
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And gather thy seed to thy threshing-floor?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The wing of the ostrich beats joyously,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But her pinions and feathers are cruel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For she trusteth her eggs to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And she setteth them down in the dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Forgetting that foot may crush them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or beast of the field tread upon them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Her young she treats harshly, as strangers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Unmoved though her toil be in vain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For God hath not dealt to her wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor alloted to her understanding.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}She scuddeth along in her flight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
At the horse and his rider she laugheth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Dost thou give to the war-horse his strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Clothe his neck with the quivering mane?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Dost thou make him to leap like a locust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With snort that is splendid and terrible?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He paweth the valley exulting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
As forth to the fight the fares.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He laughs undismayed at the terror,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He turneth not back from the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Against him the quiver may rattle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The glittering spear or the dart:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}He devoureth the ground in wild rage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Without turning to right hand or left.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}At the trumpet alarm he saith "Ha!"
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
For he scenteth the battle afar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The thunder of captains, the shouting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Doth the hawk soar aloft by thy wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And spread out her wings to the south?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Doth the eagle mount up at thy bidding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And make her nest high on the mountains?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The cliff is her home where she lodges\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The peak of the cliff and the fortress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}She spieth her prey from the heights
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With those eyes that see from afar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Her young ones suck up blood:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Where the slain are, there is she.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Rebuke

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 40}Shall a caviller strive with Almighty?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He that argues with God \uc1\u8211* let him answer.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Job answered Jehovah and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Ah, how small am I! What can I answer?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I lay my hand on my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Once indeed have I spoken; \uc1\u8211* enough:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Yea twice \uc1\u8211* but not ever again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Wilt thou disallow my right.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And condemn me that thou mayest be justified?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Hast thou an arm like God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
With a voice like His canst thou thunder?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now deck thee with pride and with majesty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Clothe thee with glory and splendour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Pour forth the floods of thine anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And all that is lofty abase.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Every proud one lay low whom thou seest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And crush thou the wicked beneath thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Hide them together in dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And bind their faces in darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And I then will render thee praise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That thy right hand hath won thee the victory.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 Two Wonderful Creatures of God

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Hippopotamus

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Behold now the huge beast beside thee:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He eateth up grass like an ox.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Behold now the strength in his loins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And the force in the muscles of his belly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He holds his tail stiff as a cedar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His thighs are of sinews entwined.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}His bones are as tubes of brass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His limbs are like bars of iron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He is chief of the ways of God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Made to lord it over his fellows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The mountains yields him their fruits;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
All the wild beasts he grindeth to powder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}There under the lotus he lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
In the covert of reed and fen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Protected by shade of the lotus,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Encircled by water-willows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}From the wild rushing torrent he flees not;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He is calm in the swell of a Jordan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Who would venture to make for his eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or to pierce through his nose with a cord?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Crocodile

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 41}Canst thou draw out the crocodile with hook,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or press his tongue down with a cord?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Canst thou put a rope into his nose,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or pierce his jaws through with a hook?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Will he make many prayers unto thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or will he speak softly to thee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Will he make any tryst with thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
To be kept as thy servant for ever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Wilt thou play with him as with a bird,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or attach him to string for thy maidens?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Shall the (fisher) guilds traffic in him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Shall the merchants divide him in pieces?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Canst thou fill his skin with barbs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or his head with the fish-harpon?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Lay but thine hand upon him:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Remember the battle \uc1\u8211* enough!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}See! thy hope is but an illusion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
God hurleth the dread of him far.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Not one is so bold as to rouse him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Where is he that can stand before him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Who hath ever triumphantly braved him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Beneath the whole heaven, not one.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Of his limbs I will not keep silence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Of his strength and his mighty equipment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Who can lay bare the face of his garment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Or enter the folds of his breastplate?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Who can open the doors of his face?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Round about his teeth lieth terror.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}His back is a ripple of shields,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And his breast is a seal of flint.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}One shield is so near to another
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
That no air can come between them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Each cleaveth so close to his fellow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So locked, that they cannot be served.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Through the breath of his nostrils light flashes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
His eyes are the lids of the morning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Out of his mouth go torches
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And sparks of fire leap forth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Smoke issues out of his nostrils,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Like a seething and boiling pot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}His breath setteth coals ablaze,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And a flame goeth forth from his mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}His neck is the home of strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And terror danceth before him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The flakes of his flesh are welded
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
So firm that they cannot be moved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}His heart is as firm as a stone\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Yea, firm as the nether mill-stone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When he lifts himself, strong men are terrified;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
At his teeth are the mighty dismayed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}No sword availeth against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor spear nor dart nor arrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He counteth iron as straw,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And brass as rotten wood;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}No arrow can put him to flight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
On him sling-stones are turned to stubble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Clubs are counted as reed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And he laughs at the whirr of a javelin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Beneath him (his scales, like) sharp sherds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Spread marks, as of sledge, on the mire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}He makes the deep boil like a pot;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He stirreth the sea like ointment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}In his wake is a shinning path\uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
One would think the deep to be hoary.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}There is not his like upon earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Created to know no fear.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Everything that is high is afraid of him:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He is king o\uc1\u8217*er the sons of pride.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 42}I acknowledge that Thou hast prevailed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There is nothing too hard for Thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3b}Therefore spake I without understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3c}Of wonders beyond my knowledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I had heard of Thee but by hearsay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
But now mine eye hath seen Thee;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And therefore I spurn (my words)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
And repent in dust and in ashes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Epilogue

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Friends Rebuked

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So after Jehovah has spoken these words to Job,He said to Eliphaz the Temanite, "My anger ishot against thee and thy two friends; because,unlike my servant Job, ye have not spoken the{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}truth about me. But now, go to my servant Jobwith seven bullocks and seven rams, and offer themas a burnt-offering for yourselves, and my servantJob shall pray for you; for, our of regard for him,I will not put you to confusion for your failure tospeak the truth about me, as my servant Job has{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}done." So Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad theShuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite went and didas Jehovah told them, and Jehovah had regard untoJob.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Restoration of Job

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So when Job prayed for his friends, Jehovahchanged his fortunes, giving him double of all he{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}had before. Then his brothers and sister and oldfriends came \uc1\u8211* every one of them \uc1\u8211* and dinedwith him at his home; and they condoled withhim, and comforted him for all the misery thatJehovah had brought upon him. Besides, each ofthem made him a present of a piece of money and agold ring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Thus in the end Jehovah made Job more blessedthan he was at the first \uc1\u8211* with his fourteen thousandsheep, six thousand camels, one thousand yoke of{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}oxen, and one thousand she-asses. Besides, he hadseven sons, and three daughters whom he named{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}in the order of their birth Jemimah, Keziah, and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Keren-happuch. In all the world were no womenfound so fair as the daughters of Job, and theirfather made them sharers in his inheritance withtheir brothers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}After this Job lived a hundred and forty years.Thus he was spared to see not only his children, buthis grandchildren \uc1\u8211* four generations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Job died \uc1\u8211* old and full of days.
\par}

}