{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Haggai (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Haggai

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The call to rebuild the Temple

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the second year of Darius the king, on the first day of the sixth month, this message from the {\scaps Lord} came through Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The people say that the time has not yet come to rebuild the temple of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then this message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai the prophet:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Is it a time for you yourselves to live in your own well-roofed houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
while this temple lies in ruins?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Consider your past experiences.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You sow much,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
but bring in little;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you eat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
but you do not have enough;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you drink,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
but are not filled;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you clothe yourselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
but not enough to be warm;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and those who earn wages,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
put those wages in a bag with holes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Consider your experiences.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Go up to the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and bring wood
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and rebuild the temple;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
then I will be pleased with it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and I will reveal my glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You looked for much,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and it came to little;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and when you brought the harvest home,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I blew it away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Why?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Because my temple lies in ruins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
while you shelter in your own houses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The heavens withhold the dew,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth withholds its fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and I have called forth a drought upon the land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and upon the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and upon the grain and the new wine and the oil
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and upon that which the ground brings forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and upon people and animals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and upon all the labor of your hands.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshua the son of Jehozadak the high priest, with all the rest of the people, obeyed the command of the {\scaps Lord} their God and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the {\scaps Lord} their God had sent him to them. They showed proper respect for the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Haggai, the prophet of the {\scaps Lord}, as the {\scaps Lord} commanded him, told the people: \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} says: I am with you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the {\scaps Lord} stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Jehozadak the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people, so that they came and worked on the temple of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, their God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}in the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The future glory of the new Temple

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
In the second year of Darius the king,{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}on the twenty-first day of the seventh month, this message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai the prophet,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}telling him to speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to all the rest of the people:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Who is left among you that saw this temple in its former glory?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And how do you see it now?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Doesn\uc1\u8217*t it seem as though there is nothing there?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yet now be strong, Zerubbabel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
be strong, Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
be strong, all you people of the land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Begin the work, for I am with you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When your ancestors left Egypt I made a promise to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and I am still with you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Do not be afraid!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In a little while, I will shake the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth, and the sea, and the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And I will shake all nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the precious things of all nations shall come here;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and I will fill this temple with glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The silver is mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the gold is mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The later glory of this temple
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
shall be greater than the former.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In this place I will grant prosperity.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
This is the message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Former displeasure and the new promise of blessings

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, this message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai the prophet:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: \uc1\u8220*Ask the priests for a ruling:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*If one carries consecrated meat in the fold of his garment, and with that garment touches bread, or stew, or wine, or oil, or any food, will it become holy?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
And the priests answered: \uc1\u8220*No.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then said Haggai, \uc1\u8220*If one who is unclean by reason of a dead body touches any of these, will it be unclean?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
And the priests answered: \uc1\u8220*It would be unclean.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Haggai replied: \uc1\u8220*So is this people and so is this nation before me, the {\scaps Lord} declares, and so is every work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Think back from this day, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}How were you? When you came to a heap of grain expecting twenty measures, there were only ten; when you came to the wine vat to draw out fifty vessels, there were only twenty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*I struck all the work of your hands with blasting and blight, with mildew and with hail. Yet you didn\uc1\u8217*t turn to me,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord},{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Think back from this day, think! From the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day when the foundations of the temple of the {\scaps Lord} were laid, and consider.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The seed is in the granary, but the vine and the fig tree and the pomegranate and the olive tree have not yet brought forth fruit. From this day will I bless you.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Zerubbabel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}This message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai a second time on the twenty-fourth day of the month:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Tell Zerubbabel, governor of Judah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will shake the heavens and the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and I will overthrow the chariots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and those who ride in them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the horses and their riders shall come down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
each by the sword of his fellow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}In that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will take you, Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} says,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and will make you like a signet ring, for I have chosen you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says.
\par}

}