{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Mark (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Good News According to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Mark

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Preparation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The beginning of the good news about Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It is said in the prophet Isaiah \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I am sending my messenger ahead of you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 he will prepare your way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
1{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
2 \uc1\u8220*Prepare the road for the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
3 make a straight path for him.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}John the Baptizer appeared in the wilderness, proclaiming a baptism on repentance, for the forgiveness of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The whole of Judea, as well as all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, went out to him; and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}John wore clothes made of camels\uc1\u8217* hair, with a leather strap around his waist, and lived on locusts and wild honey;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and he proclaimed \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*After me is coming someone more powerful than I am, and I am not fit even to stoop down and unfasten his sandals.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I have baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now about that time Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Just as he was coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens split open and the Spirit coming down to him like a dove,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and from the heavens came a voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You are my dearly loved son; you bring me great joy.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Immediately afterward the Spirit drove Jesus out into the wilderness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and among the wild beasts, while the angels helped him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Work in Galilee

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}After John had been arrested, Jesus went to Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*The time has come, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe the good news.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}As Jesus was going along the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*Come and follow me,\uc1\u8221* Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*and I will teach you to fish for people.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They left their nets at once, and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Going on a little further, he saw James, Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s son, and his brother John, who were in their boat mending the nets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Jesus called them at once, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the crew, and went after him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They walked to Capernaum. On the next Sabbath Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The people were amazed at his teaching, for he taught them like one who had authority, and not like the teachers of the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now there was in their synagogue at the time a man under the power of a foul spirit, who called out,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*What do you want with us, Jesus the Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are \uc1\u8211* the Holy One of God!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But Jesus rebuked the spirit, \uc1\u8220*Be silent! Come out from him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The foul spirit threw the man into a fit, and with a loud cry came out from him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They were all so amazed that they kept asking each other, \uc1\u8220*What is this? What is this, a new kind of teaching? He gives his commands with authority even to the foul spirits, and they obey him!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}His fame spread at once in all directions, through the whole region of Galilee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As soon as they had left the synagogue, they went to the house of Simon and Andrew, along with James and John.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Now Simon\uc1\u8217*s mother-in-law was lying ill with a fever, and they at once told Jesus about her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Jesus went up to her and, grasping her hand, raised her up; the fever left her, and she began to take care of them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}In the evening, after sunset, the people brought to Jesus all who were ill or possessed by demons;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and the whole city was gathered around the door.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Jesus cured many who were ill with various diseases, and drove out many demons, and would not permit them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}In the morning, long before daylight, Jesus got up and went out to a lonely spot, where he began to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But Simon and his companions went out searching for him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and, when they found him, they exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*Everyone is looking for you!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8220*Let us go somewhere else, into the country towns nearby so that I can make my proclamation in them also; for that was why I came.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}And he went about making his proclamation in their synagogues all through Galilee, and driving out the demons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}One day a leper came to Jesus and, falling on his knees, begged him for help. \uc1\u8220*If only you are willing,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*you are able to make me clean.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Moved with compassion, Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8220*I am willing; become clean.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Instantly the leprosy left the man, and he became clean;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}and then Jesus, after sternly warning him, immediately sent him away,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Be careful not to say anything to anyone; but go and show yourself to the priest, and make the offerings for your cleansing directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}The man, however, went away, and began to speak about it publicly, and to spread the story so widely, that Jesus could no longer go openly into a town, but stayed outside in lonely places; and people came to him from every direction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Some days later, when Jesus came back to Capernaum, the news spread that he was in a house there;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and so many people collected together, that after a while there was no room for them even around the door; and he began to tell them his message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Some people came, bringing to him a paralyzed man, who was being carried by four of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They were unable to get him near to Jesus, because of the crowd, so they removed the roof above Jesus, and, when they had made an opening, they let down the mat on which the paralyzed man was lying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, \uc1\u8220*Child, your sins are forgiven.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But some of the teachers of the Law who were sitting there were debating in their minds,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*Why does this man speak like this? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins except God?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Jesus, at once intuitively aware that they were debating with themselves in this way, said to them, \uc1\u8220*Why are you debating in your minds about this?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Which is easier? \uc1\u8211* to say to the paralyzed man, \uc1\u8216*Your sins are forgiven\uc1\u8217*? Or to say \uc1\u8216*Get up, and take up your mat, and walk\uc1\u8217*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But so you may know that the Son of Man has power to forgive sins on earth\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* here he said to the paralyzed man \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*To you I say, Get up, take up your mat, and return to your home.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The man got up, and immediately took up his mat, and went out before them all; at which they were amazed, and, as they praised God, they said, \uc1\u8220*We have never seen anything like this!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus went out again to the sea; and all the people came to him, and he taught them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As he went along, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Follow me.\uc1\u8221* Levi got up and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Later on he was in his house having dinner, and a number of tax collectors and outcasts took their places at the table with Jesus and his disciples; for many of them were following him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When the teachers of the Law belonging to the party of the Pharisees saw that he was eating in the company of such people, they said to his disciples, \uc1\u8220*Why does he eat with the tax collectors and outcasts?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Hearing this, Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*It is not those who are healthy who need a doctor, but those who are ill. I did not come to call the religious, but the outcast.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now John\uc1\u8217*s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and people came and asked Jesus, \uc1\u8220*Why is it that John\uc1\u8217*s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, while yours do not?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8220*Can the groom\uc1\u8217*s friends fast, while the groom is with them? As long as they have the groom with them, they cannot fast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But the days will come, when the groom will be taken away from them, and they will fast then \uc1\u8211* when that day comes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*No one ever sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; if they do, the patch tears away from it \uc1\u8211* the new from the old \uc1\u8211* and a worse tear is made.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And no one ever puts new wine into old wine-skins; if they do, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins are lost. But new wine is put into fresh skins.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}One Sabbath, as Jesus was walking through the cornfields, his disciples began to pick the ears of wheat as they went along.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Look!\uc1\u8221* the Pharisees said to him, \uc1\u8220*why are they doing what is not allowed on the Sabbath?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8220*Have you never read,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8220*what David did when he was in need and hungry, he and his companions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}how he went into the house of God, in the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the consecrated bread, which only the priests are allowed to eat, and gave some to his comrades as well?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then Jesus added, \uc1\u8220*The Sabbath was made for people, and not people for the Sabbath;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}so the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}On another occasion Jesus went in to a synagogue, where there was a man whose hand was withered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And they watched Jesus closely, to see if he would cure the man on the Sabbath, so that they might have a charge to bring against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*Stand out in the middle,\uc1\u8221* Jesus said to the man with the withered hand;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and to the people he said, \uc1\u8220*Is it allowable to do good at the Sabbath \uc1\u8211* or harm? To save a life, or destroy it?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As they remained silent, Jesus looked around at them in anger, grieving at the hardness of their hearts, and said to the man, \uc1\u8220*Stretch out your hand.\uc1\u8221* The man stretched it out; and his hand had become sound.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Immediately on leaving the synagogue, the Pharisees and the Herodians united in laying a plot against Jesus, to put him to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, followed by a great number of people from Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}A great number, hearing of all that he was doing, came to him from Judea, from Jerusalem, from Edom, from beyond the Jordan, and from the country around Tyre and Sidon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So Jesus told his disciples to keep a small boat close by, so that the crowd would not crush him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For he had cured many of them, and so people kept crowding around him, so all who were sick might touch him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The foul spirits, too, whenever they caught sight of him, flung themselves down before him, and screamed out, \uc1\u8220*You are the Son of God\uc1\u8221*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But he repeatedly warned them not to make him known.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus made his way up the hill, and called those whom he wished; and they went to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He appointed twelve \uc1\u8211* whom he also named \uc1\u8216*apostles\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* so that they might be with him, and that he might send them out as his messengers, to preach,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and with power to drive out demons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So he appointed the Twelve \uc1\u8211* Peter (which was the name that Jesus gave to Simon),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John (to whom he gave the name of Boanerges, which means the Thunderers),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and Judas Iscariot, the man who betrayed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Jesus went into a house; and again a crowd collected, so that they were not even able to eat their food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When his relatives heard of it, they went to take charge of him, for they said that he was out of his mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The teachers of the Law, who had come down from Jerusalem, said, \uc1\u8220*He has Beelzebul in him! He drives the demons out by the help of their chief.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So Jesus called them to him, and answered them in parables, \uc1\u8220*How can Satan drive out Satan?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When a kingdom is divided against itself, it cannot last;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and when a household is divided against itself, it will not be able to last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So, if Satan is in revolt against himself and is divided, he cannot last \uc1\u8211* his end has come!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8220*No man who has broken into a strong man\uc1\u8217*s house can carry off his goods, without first tying him up; and not until then will he plunder his house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I tell you that people will be forgiven everything \uc1\u8211* their sins, and all the slanders that they utter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}but whoever slanders the Holy Spirit remains unforgiven to the end; he has to answer for an enduring sin.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}This was said in reply to the charge that he had a foul spirit in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}His mother and his brothers came, and stood outside, and sent to ask him to come to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}There was a crowd sitting around Jesus, and some of them said to him, \uc1\u8220*Look, your mother and your brothers are outside, asking for you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8220*Who is my mother? And my brothers?\uc1\u8221* was his reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then he looked around on the people sitting in a circle around him, and said, \uc1\u8220*Here are my mother and my brothers!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Whoever does the will of God is my brother and sister and mother.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Jesus again began to teach by the sea; and, as an immense crowd was gathering around him, he got into a boat, and sat in it on the sea, while all the people were on the shore at the water\uc1\u8217*s edge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then he taught them many truths in parables; and in the course of his teaching he said to them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*Listen! The sower went out to sow;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and presently, as he was sowing, some of the seed fell along the path; and the birds came, and ate it up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some fell on rocky ground, where it had not much soil, and, because the soil wasn\uc1\u8217*t deep, sprang up at once;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but, when the sun rose, it was scorched, and, because their roots were not deep enough, withered away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Some of the seed fell among brambles; but the brambles shot up and completely choked it, and it yielded no return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Some fell into good soil, and, shooting up and growing, yielded a return, amounting to thirty, sixty, and even a hundred fold.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*Let anyone who has ears to hear with hear.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Afterward, when he was alone, his followers and the Twelve asked him about his parables;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and he said, \uc1\u8220*To you the hidden truth of the kingdom of God has been imparted; but to those who are outside it all teaching takes the form of parables so that \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Though they have eyes, they may see without perceiving; and though they have ears, they may hear without understanding; otherwise some day they might turn and be forgiven.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*You do not know the meaning of this parable?\uc1\u8221* he went on, \uc1\u8220*Then how will you understand all the other parables?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The sower sows the message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The people meant by the seed that falls along the path are these \uc1\u8211* where the message is sown, but, as soon as they have heard it, Satan immediately comes and carries away the message that has been sown in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So, too, those meant by the seed sown on the rocky places are the people who, when they have heard the message, at once accept it joyfully;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}but, as they have no root, they stand only for a short time; and so, when trouble or persecution arises because of the message, they fall away at once.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Those meant by the seed sown among the brambles are different; they are the people who hear the message,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}but the cares of life, and the glamour of wealth, and cravings for many other things come in and completely choke the message, so that it gives no return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But the people meant by the seed sown on the good ground are those who hear the message, and welcome it, and yield a return, thirty, sixty, and even a hundred fold.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8220*Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under the couch, instead of being put on the lamp-stand?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}There is nothing hidden that will not come to light and nothing is concealed that will not be brought into the open.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Let all who have ears to hear with hear.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Take care what you listen to,\uc1\u8221* said Jesus. \uc1\u8220*The standard you use will be used for you, and more will be added for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For, to those who have, more will be given; while, from those who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Jesus also said, \uc1\u8220*This is what the kingdom of God is like \uc1\u8211* like a man who has scattered seed on the ground,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and then sleeps by night and rises by day, while the seed is shooting up and growing \uc1\u8211* he knows not how.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The ground bears the crop of itself \uc1\u8211* first the blade, then the ear, and then the full grain in the ear;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}but, as soon as the crop is ready, immediately he puts in the sickle because harvest has come.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jesus also said, \uc1\u8220*To what can we liken the kingdom of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}By what can we illustrate it? Perhaps by the growth of a mustard seed. This seed, when sown in the ground, though it is smaller than all other seeds,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}yet, when sown, shoots up, and becomes larger than any other herb, and puts out great branches, so that even the wild birds can roost in its shelter.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}With many such parables Jesus used to speak to the people of his message, as far as they were able to receive it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}and to them he never used to speak except in parables; but in private to his own disciples he explained everything.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}In the evening of the same day, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8220*Let us go across.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}So, leaving the crowd behind, they took him with them, just as he was, in the boat; and there were other boats with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}A violent squall came on, and the waves kept dashing into the boat, so that the boat was actually filling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Jesus was in the stern asleep on the cushion; and the disciples roused him and cried, \uc1\u8220*Teacher! Is it nothing to you that we are lost?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Jesus rose and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, \uc1\u8220*Hush! Be still!\uc1\u8221* Then the wind dropped, and a great calm followed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8220*Why are you so timid?\uc1\u8221* he exclaimed. \uc1\u8220*Have you no faith yet?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But they were struck with great awe, and said to one another, \uc1\u8220*Who can this be that even the wind and the sea obey him?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}They came to the other side of the sea \uc1\u8211* the region of the Gerasenes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, as soon as Jesus had got out of the boat, he met a man coming out of the tombs, who was under the power of a foul spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and who made his home in the tombs. No one had ever been able to secure him, even with a chain;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for, though he had many times been left secured with fetters and chains, he had snapped the chains and broken the fetters to pieces, and no one could master him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Night and day alike, he was continually shrieking in the tombs and among the hills, and cutting himself with stones.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed to the ground before him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}shrieking out in a loud voice, \uc1\u8220*What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? For God\uc1\u8217*s sake do not torment me!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For Jesus had said, \uc1\u8220*Come out from the man, you foul spirit.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And he asked him, \uc1\u8220*What is your name?\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8220*My name,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*is Legion, for there are many of us;\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and he begged Jesus again and again not to send them away out of that country.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}There was a large herd of pigs close by, feeding on the hillside;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and the spirits begged Jesus, \uc1\u8220*Send us into the pigs so that we can take possession of them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus gave them leave. They came out, and entered into the pigs; and the herd \uc1\u8211* about two thousand in number \uc1\u8211* rushed down the steep slope into the sea and were drowned in the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the men who tended them ran away, and carried the news to the town, and to the country around; and the people went to see what had happened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When they came to Jesus, they found the possessed man sitting there, clothed and in his right mind \uc1\u8211* the man who had had the \uc1\u8216*Legion\uc1\u8217* in him \uc1\u8211* and they were awe-struck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then those who had seen it related to them all that had happened to the possessed man, as well as about the pigs;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}so they began to beg Jesus to leave their region.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As Jesus was getting into the boat, the possessed man begged him to let him stay with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But Jesus refused. \uc1\u8220*Go back to your home, to your own people,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and tell them of all that the Lord has done for you, and how he took pity on you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So the man went, and began to proclaim in the district of the Ten Towns all that Jesus had done for him; and everyone was amazed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}By the time Jesus had recrossed in the boat to the opposite shore, a great number of people had gathered to meet him, and were standing by the sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}One of the leaders of the synagogue, whose name was Jairus, came and, as soon as he saw Jesus, threw himself at his feet and begged him repeatedly,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}saying, \uc1\u8220*My little daughter is at death\uc1\u8217*s door. Please come and place your hands on her so that she may recover and live.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So Jesus went with him. A great number of people followed Jesus, and kept pressing around him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile a woman who for twelve years had suffered from hemorrhage,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and undergone much at the hands of many doctors, (spending all she had without obtaining any relief, but, on the contrary, growing worse),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}heard about Jesus, came behind in the crowd, and touched his cloak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*If I can only touch his clothes,\uc1\u8221* she said, \uc1\u8220*I will get well!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At once her bleeding stopped, and she felt in herself that she was cured of her affliction.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jesus at once became aware of the power that had gone out from him, and, turning around in the crowd, he said, \uc1\u8220*Who touched my clothes?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*You see the people pressing around you,\uc1\u8221* exclaimed his disciples, \uc1\u8220*and yet you say \uc1\u8216*Who touched me?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But Jesus looked about to see who had done it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then the woman, in fear and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and threw herself down before him, and told him the whole truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8220*Daughter,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*your faith has delivered you. Go, and peace be with you; be free from your affliction.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Before he had finished speaking, some people from the house of the synagogue leader came and said, \uc1\u8220*Your daughter is dead! Why should you trouble the teacher further?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But Jesus, overhearing what they were saying, said to the synagogue leader, \uc1\u8220*Do not be afraid; only have faith.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And he allowed no one to accompany him, except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Presently they reached the leader\uc1\u8217*s house, where Jesus saw a scene of confusion \uc1\u8211* people weeping and wailing incessantly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8220*Why this confusion and weeping?\uc1\u8221* he said on entering. \uc1\u8220*The little child is not dead; she is asleep.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}They began to laugh at him; but he sent them all out, and then, with the child\uc1\u8217*s father and mother and his companions, went into the room where she was lying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Taking her hand, Jesus said to her, \uc1\u8220*Talitha, koum!\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* which means \uc1\u8216*little girl, I am speaking to you \uc1\u8211* Rise!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The little girl stood up at once, and began to walk about; for she was twelve years old. And, as soon as they saw it, they were overwhelmed with amazement;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}but Jesus repeatedly cautioned them not to let anyone know of it, and told them to give her something to eat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}On leaving that place, Jesus, followed by his disciples, went to his own part of the country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue; and the people, as they listened, were deeply impressed. \uc1\u8220*Where did he get this?\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*and what is this wisdom that has been given him? And these miracles which he is doing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Isn\uc1\u8217*t he the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? And aren\uc1\u8217*t his sisters, too, living here among us?\uc1\u8221* This proved a hindrance to their believing in him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}at which Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*A prophet is not without honor, except in his home town, and among his own relatives, and in his own home.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he could not work any miracle there, beyond placing his hands on a few infirm persons, and curing them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and he wondered at the want of faith shown by the people. Jesus went around the villages, one after another, teaching.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He called the Twelve to him, and began to send them out as his messengers, two and two, and gave them authority over foul spirits.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He instructed them to take nothing but a staff for the journey \uc1\u8211* not even bread, or a bag, or coins in their purse;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but they were to wear sandals, and not to put on a second coat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*Whenever you go to stay at a house,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*remain there until you leave that place;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and if a place does not welcome you, or listen to you, as you go out of it shake off the dust that is on the soles of your feet, as a protest against them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So they set out, and proclaimed the need of repentance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They drove out many demons, and anointed with oil many who were infirm, and cured them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now King Herod heard of Jesus; for his name had become well known. People were saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*John the Baptizer must have risen from the dead, and that is why these miraculous powers are active in him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Others again said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He is Elijah,\uc1\u8221* and others \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He is a prophet, like one of the great prophets.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But when Herod heard of him, he said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The man whom I beheaded \uc1\u8211* John \uc1\u8211* he must be risen!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For Herod himself had sent and arrested John, and put him in prison, in chains, to please Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, because Herod had married her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For John had said to Herod \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You have no right to be living with your brother\uc1\u8217*s wife.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Herodias was incensed against John, and wanted to put him to death, but was unable to do so,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}because Herod stood in fear of John, knowing him to be an upright and holy man, and protected him. He had listened to John, but still remained much perplexed, and yet he found pleasure in listening to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}A suitable opportunity, however, occurred when Herod, on his birthday, gave a dinner to his high officials, and his generals, and the foremost men in Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When his daughter \uc1\u8211* that is, the daughter of Herodias \uc1\u8211* came in and danced, she delighted Herod and those who were dining with him. \uc1\u8220*Ask me for whatever you like,\uc1\u8221* the king said to the girl, \uc1\u8220*and I will give it to you\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and he swore to her that he would give her whatever she asked him \uc1\u8211* up to half his kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The girl went out, and said to her mother \uc1\u8220*What must I ask for?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*The head of John the Baptizer,\uc1\u8221* answered her mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So she went in as quickly as possible to the king, and made her request. \uc1\u8220*I want you,\uc1\u8221* she said, \uc1\u8220*to give me at once, on a dish, the head of John the Baptist.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The king was much distressed; yet, because of his oath and of the guests at his table, he did not like to refuse her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He immediately dispatched one of his bodyguard, with orders to bring John\uc1\u8217*s head. The man went and beheaded John in the prison,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and, bringing his head on a dish, gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When John\uc1\u8217*s disciples heard of it, they came and took his body away, and laid it in a tomb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}When the apostles came back to Jesus, they told him all that they had done and all that they had taught.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*Come by yourselves privately to some lonely spot,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and rest for a while\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* for there were so many people coming and going that they had not time even to eat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So they set off privately in their boat for a lonely spot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Many people saw them going, and recognized them, and from all the towns they flocked together to the place on foot, and got there before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}On getting out of the boat, Jesus saw a great crowd, and his heart was moved at the sight of them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When it grew late, his disciples came up to him, and said, \uc1\u8220*This is a lonely spot, and it is already late.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Send the people away, so that they may go to the farms and villages around and buy themselves something to eat.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8220*It is for you to give them something to eat.\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8220*Are we to go and spend almost a year\uc1\u8217*s wages on bread,\uc1\u8221* they asked, \uc1\u8220*to give them to eat?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8220*How many loaves have you?\uc1\u8221* he asked, \uc1\u8220*Go, and see.\uc1\u8221* When they had found out, they told him, \uc1\u8220*Five, and two fish.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Jesus directed them to make all the people take their seats on the green grass, in parties;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and they sat down in groups \uc1\u8211* in hundreds, and in fifties.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Taking the five loaves and the two fish, Jesus looked up to heaven, and said the blessing; he broke the loaves into pieces, and gave them to his disciples for them to serve out to the people, and he divided the two fish also among them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Everyone had sufficient to eat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}and they picked up enough broken pieces to fill twelve baskets, as well as some of the fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}The people who ate the bread were five thousand in number.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Immediately afterward Jesus made his disciples get into the boat, and cross over in advance, in the direction of Bethsaida, while he himself was dismissing the crowd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}After he had taken leave of the people, he went away up the hill to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When evening fell, the boat was out in the middle of the sea, and Jesus on the shore alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Seeing them laboring at the oars \uc1\u8211* for the wind was against them \uc1\u8211* about three hours after midnight Jesus came towards them, walking on the water, intending to join them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}But, when they saw him walking on the water, they thought it was a ghost, and cried out;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}for all of them saw him, and were terrified. But Jesus at once spoke to them. \uc1\u8220*Courage!\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*it is I; do not be afraid!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Then he got into the boat with them, and the wind dropped. The disciples were utterly amazed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}for they had not understood about the loaves, their minds being slow to learn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret, and moored the boat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}But they had no sooner left her than the people, recognizing Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}hurried over the whole countryside, and began to carry about on mats those who were ill, wherever they heard he was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}So wherever he went \uc1\u8211* to villages, or towns, or farms \uc1\u8211* they would lay their sick in the market-places, begging him to let them touch only the tassel of his cloak; and all who touched were made well.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}One day the Pharisees and some of the teachers of the Law who had come from Jerusalem gathered around Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They had noticed that some of his disciples ate their food with their hands \uc1\u8216*defiled,\uc1\u8217* by which they meant unwashed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}(For the Pharisees, and indeed all strict Jews, will not eat without first scrupulously washing their hands, holding in this to the traditions of their ancestors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When they come from market, they will not eat without first sprinkling themselves; and there are many other customs which they have inherited and hold to, such as the ceremonial washing of cups, and jugs, and copper pans).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law asked Jesus this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*How is it that your disciples do not follow the traditions of our ancestors, but eat their food with defiled hands?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}His answer was, \uc1\u8220*It was well said by Isaiah when he prophesied about you hypocrites in the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*This is a people who honor me with their lips, while their hearts are far removed from me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but vainly do they worship me, For they teach but human precepts.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You neglect God\uc1\u8217*s commandments and hold to human traditions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Wisely do you set aside God\uc1\u8217*s commandments,\uc1\u8221* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*to keep your own traditions!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For while Moses said \uc1\u8216*Honor your father and your mother,\uc1\u8217* and \uc1\u8216*Let anyone who abuses their father or mother suffer death,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}you say \uc1\u8216*If a person says to their father or mother \uc1\u8220*Whatever of mine might have been of service to you is Corban\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* (which means \uc1\u8216*Set apart for God\uc1\u8217*) \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}why, then you do not allow them to do anything further for their father or mother!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In this way you nullify the words of God by your traditions, which you hand down; and you do many similar things.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Jesus called the people to him again, and said, \uc1\u8220*Listen to me, all of you, and mark my words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}There is nothing external to a person, which by going into them can defile them; but the things that come out of a person are the things that defile them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}  Some later manuscripts add: Let anyone with ears to hear, listen. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When Jesus went indoors, away from the crowd, his disciples began questioning him about this saying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*What, do even you understand so little?\uc1\u8221* exclaimed Jesus. \uc1\u8220*Don\uc1\u8217*t you see that there is nothing external to a person, which by going into a person, can defile them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}because it does not pass into his heart, but into his stomach, and is afterward got rid of?\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* in saying this Jesus pronounced all food clean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*It is what comes out from a person,\uc1\u8221* he added, \uc1\u8220*that defiles them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for it is from within, out of the hearts of people, that there come evil thoughts \uc1\u8211* sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}greed, wickedness, deceit, indecency, envy, slander, haughtiness, folly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}all these wicked things come from within, and do defile a person.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}On leaving that place, Jesus went to the district of Tyre and Sidon. He went into a house, and did not wish anyone to know it, but could not escape notice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For a woman, whose little daughter had a foul spirit in her, heard of him immediately, and came and threw herself at his feet \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}the woman was a foreigner, from Syrian Phoenicia \uc1\u8211* and she begged him to drive the demon out of her daughter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8220*Let the children be satisfied first,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8220*For it is not fair to take the children\uc1\u8217*s food, and throw it to dogs.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8221* she replied. \uc1\u8220*Even the dogs under the table do feed on the children\uc1\u8217*s crumbs.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*For saying that,\uc1\u8221* he answered, \uc1\u8220*you may go. The demon has gone out of your daughter.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The woman went home, and found the child lying on her bed, and the demon gone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}On returning from the district of Tyre, Jesus went, by way of Sidon, to the Sea of Galilee, across the district of the Ten Towns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Some people brought to him a man who was deaf and almost dumb, and they begged Jesus to place his hand on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Jesus took him aside from the crowd quietly, put his fingers into the man\uc1\u8217*s ears, and touched his tongue with saliva.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then, looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to the man, \uc1\u8220*Ephphatha!\uc1\u8221* which means \uc1\u8216*Be opened.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The man\uc1\u8217*s ears were opened, the string of his tongue was freed, and he began to talk plainly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Jesus insisted on their not telling anyone; but the more he insisted, the more perseveringly they made it known,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and a profound impression was made on the people. \uc1\u8220*He has done everything well!\uc1\u8221* they exclaimed. \uc1\u8220*He makes even the deaf hear and the dumb speak!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}About that time, when there was again a great crowd of people who had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him, and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*My heart is moved at the sight of all these people, for they have already been with me three days and they have nothing to eat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and if I send them away to their homes hungry, they will break down on the way; and some of them have come a long distance.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Where will it be possible,\uc1\u8221* his disciples answered, \uc1\u8220*to get sufficient bread for these people in this lonely place?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*How many loaves have you?\uc1\u8221* he asked. \uc1\u8220*Seven,\uc1\u8221* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus told the crowd to sit down on the ground. Then he took the seven loaves, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke them, and gave them to his disciples to serve out; and they served them out to the crowd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They had also a few small fish; and, after he had said the blessing, he told the disciples to serve out these as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The people had sufficient to eat, and they picked up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There were about four thousand people. Then Jesus dismissed them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Immediately afterward, getting into the boat with his disciples, Jesus went to the district of Dalmanutha.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Here the Pharisees came out, and began to argue with Jesus, asking him for some sign from the heavens, to test him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Sighing deeply, Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*Why does this generation ask for a sign? I tell you, no sign will be given it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So he left them to themselves, and, getting into the boat again, went away to the opposite shore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now the disciples had forgotten to take any bread with them, one loaf being all that they had in the boat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So Jesus gave them this warning. \uc1\u8220*Take care,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They began talking to one another about their being short of bread;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, noticing this, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8220*Why are you talking about your being short of bread? Don\uc1\u8217*t you yet see or understand? Are your minds still so slow or comprehension?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Though you have eyes, do you not see? And though you have ears, do you not hear? Don\uc1\u8217*t you remember,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}when I broke up the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets of broken pieces you picked up?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Twelve,\uc1\u8221* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*And when the seven for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of broken pieces did you pick up?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Seven,\uc1\u8221* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*Don\uc1\u8217*t you understand now?\uc1\u8221* he repeated.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}They came to Bethsaida. There some people brought a blind man to Jesus, and begged him to touch him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Taking the blind man\uc1\u8217*s hand, Jesus led him to the outskirts of the village, and, when he had put saliva on the man\uc1\u8217*s eyes, he placed his hands on him, and asked him, \uc1\u8220*Do you see anything?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The man looked up, and said, \uc1\u8220*I see the people, for, as they walk about, they look to me like trees.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Jesus again placed his hands on the man\uc1\u8217*s eyes; and the man saw clearly, his sight was restored, and he saw everything with perfect distinctness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Jesus sent him to his home, and said, \uc1\u8220*Do not go even into the village.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Afterward Jesus and his disciples went into the villages around Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Who do people say that I am?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*John the Baptist,\uc1\u8221* they answered, \uc1\u8220*but others say Elijah, while others say one of the prophets.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*But you,\uc1\u8221* he asked, \uc1\u8220*who do you say that I am?\uc1\u8221* To this Peter replied, \uc1\u8220*You are the Christ.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}At which Jesus charged them not to say this about him to anyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then he began to teach them that the Son of Man must undergo much suffering, and that he must be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and the teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise again after three days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He said all this quite openly. But Peter took Jesus aside, and began to rebuke him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Jesus, however, turning around and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter. \uc1\u8220*Out of my sight, Satan!\uc1\u8221* he exclaimed. \uc1\u8220*For you look at things, not as God does, but as people do.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Calling the people and his disciples to him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*If anyone wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, take up their cross, and follow me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For whoever wishes to save their life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake and for the sake of the good news, will lose their life will save it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}What good is it to a person to gain the whole world and forfeit their life?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For what could a person give that is of equal value with their life?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Whoever is ashamed of me and of my teaching, in this unfaithful and wicked generation, of them will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his Father\uc1\u8217*s glory with the holy angels.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}\uc1\u8220*I tell you,\uc1\u8221* he added, \uc1\u8220*that some of those who are standing here will not know death until they have seen the kingdom of God come in power.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and led them up a high mountain alone by themselves. There his appearance was transformed before their eyes,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and his clothes became whiter than any launderer in the whole world could bleach them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And Elijah appeared to them, in company with Moses; and they were talking with Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Rabbi,\uc1\u8221* said Peter, interposing, \uc1\u8220*it is good to be here; let us make three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For he did not know what to say, because they were much afraid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then a cloud came down and enveloped them; and from the cloud there came a voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*This is my dearly loved son; listen to him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And suddenly, on looking around, they saw that there was now no one with them but Jesus alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As they were going down the mountainside, Jesus cautioned them not to relate what they had seen to anyone, until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They seized on these words and discussed with one another what this \uc1\u8216*rising from the dead\uc1\u8217* meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*How is it,\uc1\u8221* they asked Jesus, \uc1\u8220*that our teachers of the Law say that Elijah has to come first?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*Elijah does indeed come first,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8220*and re-establish everything; and does not scripture speak, with regard to the Son of Man, of his undergoing much suffering and being utterly despised?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I tell you that Elijah has come, and people have treated him just as they pleased, as scripture says of him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When they came to the other disciples, they saw a great crowd around them, and some teachers of the Law arguing with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But, as soon as they saw Jesus, all the people, in great astonishment, ran up and greeted him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*What are you arguing about with them?\uc1\u8221* Jesus asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*Teacher,\uc1\u8221* answered a man in the crowd, \uc1\u8220*I brought my son to see you, as he has a spirit in him that makes him mute;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and, wherever it seizes him, it dashes him down; he foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth, and he is pining away. I asked your disciples to drive the spirit out, but they failed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8220*Faithless generation!\uc1\u8221* exclaimed Jesus. \uc1\u8220*How long must I be with you? How long must I have patience with you? Bring the boy to me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}They brought him to Jesus; but no sooner did the boy see him than the spirit threw him into convulsions; and he fell on the ground, and rolled about, foaming at the mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*How long has he been like this?\uc1\u8221* Jesus asked the boy\uc1\u8217*s father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8220*From his childhood,\uc1\u8221* he answered. \uc1\u8220*It has often thrown him into fire and into water to put an end to his life; but, if you can possibly do anything, take pity on us, and help us!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8220*Why say \uc1\u8216*possibly\uc1\u8217*?\uc1\u8221* Jesus replied. \uc1\u8220*Everything is possible for one who has faith.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The boy\uc1\u8217*s father immediately cried out, \uc1\u8220*I have faith; help my want of faith!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But, when Jesus saw that a crowd was quickly collecting, he rebuked the foul spirit, \uc1\u8220*Deaf and dumb spirit, it is I who command you. Come out from him and never enter him again.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}With a loud cry the spirit threw the boy into repeated convulsions, and then came out from him. The boy looked like a corpse, so that most of them said that he was dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But Jesus took his hand, and lifted him; and he stood up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When Jesus had gone indoors, his disciples asked him privately, \uc1\u8220*Why couldn\uc1\u8217*t we drive it out?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*A spirit of this kind,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*can be driven out only by prayer.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Leaving that place, Jesus and his disciples went on their way through Galilee; but he did not wish anyone to know it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}for he was instructing his disciples, and telling them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of his fellow men, and they will put him to death, but, when he has been put to death, he will rise again after three days.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But the disciples did not understand his meaning and were afraid to question him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They came to Capernaum. When Jesus had gone into the house, he asked them, \uc1\u8220*What were you discussing on the way?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But they were silent; for on the way they had been arguing with one another which was the greatest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Sitting down, Jesus called the Twelve and said, \uc1\u8220*If anyone wishes to be first, he must be last of all, and servant of all.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then Jesus took a little child, and placed it in the middle of them. Taking it in his arms, he said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8220*Anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even a little child like this is welcoming me, and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming not me, but him who sent me as his messenger.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8220*Teacher,\uc1\u8221* said John, \uc1\u8220*we saw a man driving out demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he did not follow us.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8220*None of you must prevent the man,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8220*for no one will use my name in working a miracle, and yet find it easy to speak evil of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}He who is not against us is for us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}If anyone gives you a cup of water because you belong to Christ, I tell you, he will assuredly not lose his reward.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8220*And, if anyone puts temptation in the way of one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be far better for him if he had been thrown into the sea with a great millstone around his neck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It would be better for you to enter the life maimed, than to have both your hands and go into Gehenna, into the fire that cannot be put out.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}  Some later manuscripts add here or at verse 46: where their worm never dies and the fire is never quenched. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}If your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It would be better for you to enter the life lame, than to have both your feet and be thrown into Gehenna.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}  See the note on verse 44. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}If your eye causes you to sin, tear it out. It would be better for you to enter the kingdom of God with only one eye, than to have both eyes and be thrown into Gehenna,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}where their worm does not die, and the fire is not put out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}For it is by fire that everyone will be salted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Salt is good, but, if the salt should lose its saltiness, what will you use to season it?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 You must have salt in yourselves, and live at peace with one another.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Journey to Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}On leaving that place, Jesus went into the district of Judea on the other side of the Jordan. Crowds gathered about him again; and again, as usual, he began teaching them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Presently some Pharisees came up and, to test him, asked, \uc1\u8220*Has a husband the right to divorce his wife?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*What direction did Moses give you?\uc1\u8221* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Moses,\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*permitted a man to draw up in writing a notice of separation and divorce his wife.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*It was owing to the hardness of your hearts,\uc1\u8221* said Jesus, \uc1\u8220*that Moses gave you this direction;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but, at the beginning of the Creation, \uc1\u8216*God made them male and female.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*For this reason a man will leave his father and mother,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and the man and his wife will become one;\uc1\u8217* so that they are no longer two, but one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What God himself, then, has yoked together no one must separate.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When they were indoors, the disciples asked him again about this,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and he said, \uc1\u8220*Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman is guilty of adultery against his wife;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and, if the woman divorces her husband and marries another man, she is guilty of adultery.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Some of the people were bringing little children to Jesus, for him to touch them; but the disciples rebuked those who had brought them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When, however, Jesus saw this, he was indignant. \uc1\u8220*Let the little children come to me,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*do not hinder them; for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of God belongs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I tell you, unless a person receives the kingdom of God like a child, they will not enter it at all.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then he embraced the children, and, placing his hands on them, gave them his blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As Jesus was resuming his journey, a man came running up to him, and threw himself on his knees before him. \uc1\u8220*Good teacher,\uc1\u8221* he asked, \uc1\u8220*what must I do to gain eternal life?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*Why do you call me good?\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8220*No one is good but God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}You know the commandments \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Do not kill. Do not commit adultery. Do not steal. Do not say what is false about others. Do not cheat. Honor your father and your mother.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*Teacher,\uc1\u8221* he replied, \uc1\u8220*I have observed all these from my childhood.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus looked at the man, and his heart went out to him, and he said, \uc1\u8220*There is still one thing wanting in you; go and sell all that you have, and give to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the man\uc1\u8217*s face clouded at these words, and he went away distressed, for he had great possessions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then Jesus looked around, and said to his disciples, \uc1\u8220*How hard it will be for people of wealth to enter the kingdom of God!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus said again, \uc1\u8220*My children, how hard a thing it is to enter the kingdom of God!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It is easier for a camel to get through a needle\uc1\u8217*s eye, than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*Then who can be saved?\uc1\u8221* they exclaimed in the greatest astonishment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Jesus looked at them, and answered, \uc1\u8220*With people it is impossible, but not with God; for everything is possible with God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*But we,\uc1\u8221* began Peter, \uc1\u8220*we left everything and have followed you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*I tell you,\uc1\u8221* said Jesus, \uc1\u8220*there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or land, for my sake and for the good news,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}who will not receive a hundred times as much, even now in the present \uc1\u8211* houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land, though not without persecutions \uc1\u8211* and in the age that is coming, eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But many who are first now will then be last, and the last will be first.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}They were on the road going up to Jerusalem, with Jesus walking in front of them. The disciples were filled with awe, while those who were following behind were overwhelmed with fear. Gathering the Twelve around him once more, Jesus began to tell them what was about to happen to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8220*Listen!\uc1\u8221* he said. \uc1\u8220*We are going up to Jerusalem; and there the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, and they will condemn him to death, and they will give him up to the Gentiles,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}who will mock him, spit on him, and scourge him, and put him to death; and after three days he will rise again.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}James and John, the two sons of Zebedee, went to Jesus, and said, \uc1\u8220*Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8220*What do you want me to do for you?\uc1\u8221* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8220*Grant us this,\uc1\u8221* they answered, \uc1\u8220*to sit, one on your right, and the other on your left, when you come in glory.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8220*You do not know what you are asking,\uc1\u8221* Jesus said to them. \uc1\u8220*Can you drink the cup that I am to drink? Or receive the baptism that I am to receive?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8220*Yes,\uc1\u8221* they answered, \uc1\u8220*we can.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*You will indeed drink the cup that I am to drink,\uc1\u8221* Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*and receive the baptism that I am to receive,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}but as to a seat at my right or at my left \uc1\u8211* that is not mine to give, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}On hearing of this, the ten others were at first very indignant about James and John.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}But Jesus called the ten to him, and said, \uc1\u8220*Those who are regarded as ruling among the Gentiles lord it over them, as you know, and their great men oppress them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}But among you it is not so. No, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and whoever wants to take the first place among you must be the servant of all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}for even the Son of Man came, not be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}They came to Jericho. When Jesus was going out of the town with his disciples and a large crowd, Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the roadside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Hearing that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to call out, \uc1\u8220*Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Many of the people kept telling him to be quiet; but the man continued to call out all the louder, \uc1\u8220*Son of David, take pity on me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Then Jesus stopped. \uc1\u8220*Call him,\uc1\u8221* he said. So they called the blind man. \uc1\u8220*Have courage!\uc1\u8221* they exclaimed. \uc1\u8220*Get up; he is calling you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}The man threw off his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}\uc1\u8220*What do you want me to do for you?\uc1\u8221* said Jesus, addressing him. \uc1\u8220*Rabboni,\uc1\u8221* the blind man answered, \uc1\u8220*I want to recover my sight.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8220*You may go,\uc1\u8221* Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*Your faith has delivered you.\uc1\u8221* Immediately he recovered his sight, and began to follow Jesus along the road.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Last Days

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}When they had almost reached Jerusalem, as far as Bethphage and Bethany, near the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent on two of his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Go to the village facing you,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and, as soon as you get there, you will find a foal tethered, which no one has ever ridden; untie it, and bring it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, if anyone says to you \uc1\u8216*Why are you doing that?\uc1\u8217*, say \uc1\u8216*The Master wants it, and will be sure to send it back here at once.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The two disciples went, and, finding a foal tethered outside a door in the street, they untied it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some of the bystanders said to them, \uc1\u8220*What are you doing, untying the foal?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the two disciples answered as Jesus had told them; and they allowed them to go.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then they brought the foal to Jesus, and, when they had laid their cloaks on it, he seated himself on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Many of the people spread their cloaks on the road, while some strewed boughs which they had cut from the fields;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and those who led the way, as well as those who followed, kept shouting, \uc1\u8220*God save him! Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! God save him from on high!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Jesus entered Jerusalem, and went into the Temple Courts; and, after looking around at everything, as it was already late, he went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The next day, after they had left Bethany, Jesus became hungry;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and, noticing a fig tree at a distance in leaf, he went to it to see if by any chance he could find something on it; but, on coming up to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, addressing the tree, he exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*May no one ever again eat of your fruit!\uc1\u8221* And his disciples heard what he said.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}They came to Jerusalem. Jesus went into the Temple Courts, and began to drive out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers, and the seats of the pigeon-dealers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and would not allow anyone to carry anything across the Temple Courts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then he began to teach. \uc1\u8220*Does not scripture say,\uc1\u8221* he asked, \uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations\uc1\u8217*? But you have made it a den of robbers.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now the chief priests and the teachers of the Law heard this and began to look for some way of putting Jesus to death; for they were afraid of him, since all the people were greatly impressed by his teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}As soon as evening fell, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}As they passed by early in the morning, they noticed that the fig tree was withered up from the roots.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then Peter recalled what had occurred. \uc1\u8220*Look, Rabbi,\uc1\u8221* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*the fig tree which you doomed is withered up!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8220*Have faith in God!\uc1\u8221* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8220*I tell you that if anyone should say to this hill \uc1\u8216*Be lifted up and hurled into the sea!\uc1\u8217*, without ever a doubt in his mind, but in the faith that what he says will be done, he would find that it would be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And therefore I say to you \uc1\u8216*Have faith that whatever you ask for in prayer is already granted you, and you will find that it will be.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8220*And, whenever you stand up to pray, forgive any grievance that you have against anyone, so that your Father who is in heaven also may forgive you your offenses.\uc1\u8221*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}  Some later manuscripts add: But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your offenses. }
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They came to Jerusalem again. While Jesus was walking about in the Temple Courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders came up to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*What authority have you to do these things?\uc1\u8221* they said. \uc1\u8220*Who gave you the authority to do them?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*I will put one question to you,\uc1\u8221* said Jesus. \uc1\u8220*Answer me that, and then I will tell you what authority I have to act as I do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}It is about John\uc1\u8217*s baptism. Was it of divine or human origin? Answer me that.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}They began arguing together. \uc1\u8220*If we say \uc1\u8216*divine,\uc1\u8217* he will say \uc1\u8216*Why then didn\uc1\u8217*t you believe him?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Yet can we say \uc1\u8216*human\uc1\u8217*?\uc1\u8221* They were afraid of the people, for everyone regarded John as undoubtedly a prophet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}So their answer to Jesus was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*We do not know.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Then I,\uc1\u8221* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8220*refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Jesus began to speak to them in parables, \uc1\u8220*A man once planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a wine-press, built a tower, and then let it out to tenants and went abroad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants, to receive from them a share of the produce of the grape harvest;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}but they seized him, and beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A second time the owner sent a servant to them; this man, too, the tenants struck on the head, and insulted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He sent another, but him they killed; and so with many others \uc1\u8211* some they beat and some they killed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He had still one son, who was very dear to him; and him he sent to them last of all. \uc1\u8216*They will respect my son,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But those tenants said to one another \uc1\u8216*Here is the heir! Come, let us kill him, and his inheritance will be ours.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So they seized him, and killed him, and threw his body outside the vineyard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and put the tenants to death, and he will let the vineyard to others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*Have you never read this passage of scripture? \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The stone which the builders despised has now itself become the cornerstone;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}this cornerstone has come from the Lord, and is marvelous in our eyes.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}After this his enemies were eager to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd; for they saw that it was at them that he had aimed the parable. So they left him alone, and went away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Afterward they sent to Jesus some of the Pharisees and Herodians, to set a trap for him in the course of conversation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}These men came to him and said, \uc1\u8220*Teacher, we know that you are an honest man, and are not afraid of anyone, for you pay no regard to a person\uc1\u8217*s position, but teach the way of God honestly; are we right in paying taxes to the Emperor, or not?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Should we pay, or should we not pay?\uc1\u8221* Knowing their hypocrisy, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8220*Why are you testing me? Bring me a coin to look at.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And, when they had brought it, he asked, \uc1\u8220*Whose head and title are these?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*The Emperor\uc1\u8217*s,\uc1\u8221* they said;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and Jesus replied, \uc1\u8220*Pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.\uc1\u8221* And they were amazed at him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Next came some Sadducees \uc1\u8211* the men who maintain that there is no resurrection. Their question was this \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8220*Teacher, in our scriptures Moses decreed that, should a man\uc1\u8217*s brother die, leaving a widow but no child, the man should take the widow as his wife, and raise up a family for his brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}There were once seven brothers. The eldest married, but died and left no family;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and the second married his widow, and died without family; and so did the third.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}All the seven died and left no family. The woman herself died last of all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At the resurrection whose wife will she be, all seven brothers having had her as their wife?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Is not the reason of your mistake,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8220*your ignorance of the scriptures and of the power of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When people rise from the dead, there is no marrying or being married; but they are as angels in heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*As to the dead, and the fact that they rise, have you never read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the Bush, how God spoke to him saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob\uc1\u8217*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He is not God of dead people, but of living. You are greatly mistaken.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then came up one of the teachers of the Law who had heard their discussions. Knowing that Jesus had answered them wisely, he asked him this question, \uc1\u8220*Which commandment is the most important of all?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*The most important,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8220*is \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Hear, Israel; the Lord our God is the one Lord;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and you must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The second is this \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You must love your neighbor as you love yourself.\uc1\u8217* There is no commandment greater than these.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*Wisely answered, teacher!\uc1\u8221* exclaimed the teacher of the Law. \uc1\u8220*It is true, as you say, that there is one God, and that there is no other besides him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and to love him with all one\uc1\u8217*s heart, and with all one\uc1\u8217*s understanding, and with all one\uc1\u8217*s strength, and to love one\uc1\u8217*s neighbor as one loves oneself is far beyond all burnt offerings and sacrifices.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Seeing that he had answered with discernment, Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8220*You are not far from the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 After that no one ventured to question him further.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}While Jesus was teaching in the Temple Courts, he asked, \uc1\u8220*How is it that the teachers of the Law say that the Christ is to be David\uc1\u8217*s son?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}David said himself, speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The Lord said to my lord: Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies beneath your feet.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}David himself calls him \uc1\u8216*lord,\uc1\u8217* how comes it, then, that he is to be his son?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The mass of the people listened to Jesus with delight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}In the course of his teaching, Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*See that you are on your guard against the teachers of the Law, who delight to walk about in long robes, and to be greeted in the streets with respect,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and to have the best seats in the synagogues, and places of honor at dinner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}They are the men who rob widows of their homes, and make a pretense of saying long prayers. Their sentence will be all the heavier.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Then Jesus sat down opposite the chests for the Temple offerings, and watched how the people put money into them. Many rich people were putting in large sums;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}but one poor widow came and put in two small coins, worth very little.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then, calling his disciples to him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*I tell you that this poor widow has put in more than all the others who were putting money into the chests;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}for everyone else put in something from what he had to spare, while she, in her need, put in all she had \uc1\u8211* everything that she had to live on.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}As Jesus was walking out of the Temple Courts, one of his disciples said to him, \uc1\u8220*Teacher, look what fine stones and buildings these are!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Do you see these great buildings?\uc1\u8221* asked Jesus. \uc1\u8220*Not a single stone will be left here on another, which will not be thrown down.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When Jesus had sat down on the Mount of Olives, facing the Temple, Peter, James, John and Andrew questioned him privately,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign when all this is drawing to its close.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jesus began, \uc1\u8220*See that no one leads you astray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Many will take my name, and come saying \uc1\u8216*I am He\uc1\u8217*, and will lead many astray.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*And, when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed; such things must occur; but the end is not yet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in various places; there will be famines. This will be but the beginning of the birth-pangs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*See to yourselves! They will betray you to courts of law; and you will be taken to synagogues and beaten; and you will be brought up before governors and kings for my sake, so that you can bear witness before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But the good news must first be proclaimed to every nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Whenever they betray you and hand you over for trial, do not be anxious beforehand as to what you will say, but say whatever is given you at the moment; for it will not be you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Brother will betray brother to death, and the father his child; and children will turn against their parents, and cause them to be put to death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and you will be hated by everyone because of me. Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*As soon, however, as you see \uc1\u8216*the Foul Desecration\uc1\u8217* standing where it ought not\uc1\u8221* (the reader must consider what this means) \uc1\u8220*then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and a person on the house-top must not go down, or go in to get anything out of their house:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}nor must one who is on their farm turn back to get their cloak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Pray, too, that this may not occur in winter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For those days will be a time of distress, the like of which has not occurred from the beginning of God\uc1\u8217*s creation until now \uc1\u8211* and never will again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And, had not the Lord put a limit to those days, not a single soul would escape; but, for the sake of God\uc1\u8217*s own chosen people, he did limit them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*And at that time if anyone should say to you \uc1\u8216*Look, here is the Christ!\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*Look, there he is!\uc1\u8217*, do not believe it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}for false Christs and false prophets will arise, and display signs and marvels, to lead astray, were it possible, even God\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But see that you are on your guard! I have told you all this beforehand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*In those days, after that time of distress, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}the stars will be falling from the heavens, and the forces that are in the heavens will be convulsed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then will be seen the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and then he will send the angels, and gather his people from the four winds, from one end of the world to the other.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*Learn the lesson taught by the fig tree. As soon as its branches are full of sap, and it is bursting into leaf, you know that summer is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And so may you, as soon as you see these things happening, know that he is at your doors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I tell you that even the present generation will not pass away, until all these things have taken place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*But about that day, or the hour, no one knows \uc1\u8211* not even the angels in heaven, not even the Son \uc1\u8211* but only the Father.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8220*See that you are on the watch; for you do not know when the time will be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}It is like a man going on a journey, who leaves his home, puts his servants in charge \uc1\u8211* each having their special duty \uc1\u8211* and orders the porter to watch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Therefore watch, for you cannot be sure when the Master of the house is coming \uc1\u8211* whether in the evening, at midnight, at daybreak, or in the morning \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}otherwise he might come suddenly and find you asleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And what I say to you I say to all \uc1\u8211* Watch!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}It was now two days before the Festival of the Passover and the unleavened bread. The chief priests and the teachers of the Law were looking for an opportunity to arrest Jesus by stealth, and to put him to death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for they said, \uc1\u8220*Not during the Festival, or the people may riot.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When Jesus was still at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, while he was sitting at the table, a woman came with an alabaster jar of choice spikenard perfume of great value. She broke the jar, and poured the perfume on his head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Some of those who were present said to one another indignantly, \uc1\u8220*Why has the perfume been wasted like this?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}This perfume could have been sold for more than a year\uc1\u8217*s wages, and the money given to the poor.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*Leave her alone,\uc1\u8221* said Jesus, as they began to find fault with her, \uc1\u8220*why are you troubling her? This is a beautiful deed that she has done for me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You always have the poor with you, and whenever you wish you can do good to them; but you will not always have me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}She has done what she could; she has perfumed my body beforehand for my burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And I tell you, wherever, in the whole world, the good news is proclaimed, what this woman has done will be told in memory of her.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}After this, Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests, to betray Jesus to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They were glad to hear what he said, and promised to pay him. So he began looking for a good opportunity to betray Jesus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On the first day of the Festival of the unleavened bread, when it was customary to kill the Passover lambs, his disciples said to Jesus, \uc1\u8220*Where do you wish us to go and make preparations for your eating the Passover?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus sent forward two of his disciples and said to them, \uc1\u8220*Go into the city, and there a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you; follow him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and, wherever he goes in, say to the owner of the house \uc1\u8216*The teacher says \uc1\u8211* Where is my room where I am to eat the Passover with my disciples?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He will himself show you a large upstairs room, set out ready; and there make preparations for us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So the disciples set out and went into the city, and found everything just as Jesus had told them; and they prepared the Passover.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In the evening he went there with the Twelve,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and when they had taken their places and were eating, Jesus said, \uc1\u8220*I tell you that one of you is going to betray me \uc1\u8211* one who is eating with me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They were grieved at this, and began to say to him, one after another, \uc1\u8220*Can it be I?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*It is one of you Twelve,\uc1\u8221* said Jesus, \uc1\u8220*the one who is dipping his bread beside me into the dish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}True, the Son of Man must go, as scripture says of him, yet alas for that man by whom the Son of Man is being betrayed! For that man it would be better never to have been born!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}While they were eating, Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, and said, \uc1\u8220*Take it; this is my body.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then he took a cup, and, after saying the thanksgiving, gave it to them, and they all drank from it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*This is my covenant-blood,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*which is poured out on behalf of many.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I tell you that I will never again drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I will drink it new in the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They then sang a hymn, and went out up the Mount of Olives,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}presently Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8220*All of you will fall away; for scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I will strike down the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Yet, after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*Even if everyone else falls away,\uc1\u8221* said Peter, \uc1\u8220*I will not.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8220*I tell you,\uc1\u8221* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8220*that you yourself today \uc1\u8211* yes, this very night \uc1\u8211* before the cock crows twice, will disown me three times.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But Peter vehemently protested, \uc1\u8220*Even if I must die with you, I will never disown you!\uc1\u8221* And they all said the same.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Presently they came to a garden known as Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples \uc1\u8220*Sit down here while I pray.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He took with him Peter, James, and John; and began to show signs of great dismay and deep distress of mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8220*I am sad at heart,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*sad even to death; wait here, and watch.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Going on a little further, he threw himself on the ground, and began to pray that, if it were possible, he might be spared that hour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8220*Abba, Father,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*all things are possible to you; take away this cup from me; yet, not what I will, but what you will.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Then he came and found the three apostles asleep. \uc1\u8220*Simon,\uc1\u8221* he said to Peter, \uc1\u8220*are you asleep? Couldn\uc1\u8217*t you watch for one hour?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Watch and pray,\uc1\u8221* he said to them all, \uc1\u8220*so that you may not fall into temptation. True, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Again he went away, and prayed in the same words;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and coming back again he found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy; and they did not know what to say to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}A third time he came, and said to them, \uc1\u8220*Sleep on now, and rest yourselves. Enough! My time has come. Look, the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of wicked people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Up, and let us be going. Look! My betrayer is close at hand.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And just then, while he was still speaking, Judas, who was one of the Twelve, came up; and with him a crowd of people, with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them. \uc1\u8220*The man whom I kiss,\uc1\u8221* he had said, \uc1\u8220*will be the one; arrest him and take him away safely.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}As soon as Judas came, he went up to Jesus at once, and said, \uc1\u8220*Rabbi!\uc1\u8221* and kissed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Then the men seized Jesus, and arrested him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}One of those who were standing by drew his sword, and struck at the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servant, and cut off his ear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}But Jesus spoke up, and said to the men, \uc1\u8220*Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}I have been among you day after day in the Temple Courts teaching, and yet you did not arrest me; but this is in fulfillment of the scriptures.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}And all the apostles deserted him and fled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}One young man did indeed follow him, wrapped only in a linen sheet. They tried to arrest him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}but he left the sheet in their hands, and fled naked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Then they took Jesus to the high priest; and all the chief priests, elders, and the teachers of the Law assembled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Peter, who had followed Jesus at a distance into the courtyard of the high priest, was sitting there among the guards, warming himself at the blaze of the fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}Meanwhile the chief priest and the whole of the High Council were trying to get such evidence against Jesus as would warrant his being put to death, but they could not find any;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}for, though there were many who gave false evidence against him, yet their evidence did not agree.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}Presently some men stood up, and gave this false evidence against him \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}\uc1\u8220*We ourselves heard him say \uc1\u8216*I will destroy this Temple made with hands, and in three days build another made without hands.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}Yet not even on that point did their evidence agree.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}Then the high priest stood forward, and questioned Jesus. \uc1\u8220*Have you no answer to make?\uc1\u8221* he asked. \uc1\u8220*What is this evidence which these men are giving against you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}But Jesus remained silent, and made no answer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 A second time the high priest questioned him. \uc1\u8220*Are you,\uc1\u8221* he asked, \uc1\u8220*the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}\uc1\u8220*I am,\uc1\u8221* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8220*and you will all see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Almighty, and coming in the clouds of heaven.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}At this the high priest tore his vestments. \uc1\u8220*Why do we want any more witnesses?\uc1\u8221* he exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}\uc1\u8220*You heard his blasphemy? What is your verdict?\uc1\u8221* They all condemned him, declaring that he deserved death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}Some of those present began to spit at him, and to blindfold his eyes, and strike him, saying, as they did so, \uc1\u8220*Now play the prophet!\uc1\u8221* and even the guards received him with blows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}While Peter was in the courtyard down below, one of the high priest\uc1\u8217*s maidservants came up;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}and, seeing Peter warming himself, she looked closely at him, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*Why, you were with Jesus, the Nazarene!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}But Peter denied it. \uc1\u8220*I do not know or understand what you mean,\uc1\u8221* he replied. Then he went out into the porch;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}and there the maidservant, on seeing him, began to say again to the bystanders, \uc1\u8220*This is one of them!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}But Peter again denied it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Soon afterward the bystanders again said to him, \uc1\u8220*You certainly are one of them; why you are a Galilean!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}But he said to them, \uc1\u8220*I swear that I do not know the man you are talking about! May God punish me if I am lying!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}At that moment, for the second time, a cock crowed; and Peter remembered the words that Jesus had said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Before a cock has crowed twice, you will disown me three times\uc1\u8217*; and, as he thought of it, he began to weep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}As soon as it was daylight, the chief priests, after holding a consultation with elders and teachers of the Law \uc1\u8211* that is to say, the whole High Council \uc1\u8211* put Jesus in chains, and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Are you the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8221* asked Pilate. \uc1\u8220*It is true,\uc1\u8221* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the chief priests brought a number of charges against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Pilate questioned Jesus again. \uc1\u8220*Have you no reply to make?\uc1\u8221* he asked. \uc1\u8220*Listen, how many charges they are bringing against you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But Jesus still made no reply whatever; at which Pilate was astonished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now, at the feast, Pilate used to grant the people the release of any one prisoner whom they might ask for.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A man called Barabbas was in prison, with the rioters who had committed murder during a riot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So, when the crowd went up and began to ask Pilate to follow his usual custom,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}he answered, \uc1\u8220*Do you want me to release the \uc1\u8216*king of the Jews\uc1\u8217* for you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For he was aware that it was out of jealousy that the chief priests had given Jesus up to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the chief priests incited the crowd to get Barabbas released instead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Pilate, however, spoke to them again, \uc1\u8220*What should I do then with the man whom you call the \uc1\u8216*king of the Jews\uc1\u8217*?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Again they shouted, \uc1\u8220*Crucify him!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*Why, what harm has he done?\uc1\u8221* Pilate kept saying to them. But they shouted furiously, \uc1\u8220*Crucify him!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Barabbas to them, and, after scourging Jesus, gave him up to be crucified.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The soldiers then took Jesus away into the courtyard \uc1\u8211* that is the Government house \uc1\u8211* and they called the whole garrison together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They dressed him in a purple robe, and, having twisted a crown of thorns, put it on him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and then began to salute him. \uc1\u8220*Long life to you, king of the Jews!\uc1\u8221* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And they kept striking him on the head with a rod, spitting at him, and bowing to the ground before him \uc1\u8211* going down on their knees;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and, when they had left off mocking him, they took off the purple robe, and put his own clothes on him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They led Jesus out to crucify him; and they compelled a passer-by, Simon from Cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to go with them to carry his cross.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}They brought Jesus to the place which was known as Golgotha \uc1\u8211* a name which means \uc1\u8216*place of a Skull.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}There they offered him drugged wine; but Jesus refused it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then they crucified him, and divided his clothes among them, casting lots for them, to settle what each should take.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It was nine in the morning when they crucified him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The words of the charge against him, written up over his head, read \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*THE KING OF THE JEWS.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And with him they crucified two robbers, one on the right, and the other on the left.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}  Some later manuscripts add: And the scripture was fulfilled that says, \uc1\u8216*He was counted among outlaws.\uc1\u8217* }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The passers-by railed at him, shaking their heads, as they said, \uc1\u8220*Ah! You who would destroy the Temple and build one in three days,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}come down from the cross and save yourself!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}In the same way the chief priests, with the teachers of the Law, said to one another in mockery,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*He saved others, but he cannot save himself! Let the Christ, the \uc1\u8216*king of Israel,\uc1\u8217* come down from the cross now so that we can see it and believe.\uc1\u8221* Even the men who had been crucified with Jesus insulted him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}At midday, a darkness came over the whole country, lasting until three in the afternoon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}And, at three, Jesus called out loudly, \uc1\u8220*Eloi, Eloi, lama sabacthani?\uc1\u8221* which means \uc1\u8216*My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Some of those standing around heard this, and said, \uc1\u8220*Listen! He is calling for Elijah!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And a man ran, and, soaking a sponge in common wine, put it on the end of a rod, and offered it to him to drink, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8220*Wait and let us see if Elijah is coming to take him down.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Jesus, giving a loud cry, breathed his last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The Temple curtain was torn in two from top to bottom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The Roman officer, who was standing facing Jesus, on seeing the way in which he breathed his last, exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*This man must indeed have been God\uc1\u8217*s son!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}There were some women also watching from a distance, among them being Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James the Little and of Joseph, and Salome \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}all of whom used to accompany Jesus when he was in Galilee, and give him support \uc1\u8211* besides many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The evening had already fallen, when, as it was the Preparation day \uc1\u8211* the day before the Sabbath \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Joseph from Arimathea, a councillor of good position, who was himself living in expectation of the kingdom of God, came and ventured to go in to see Pilate, and to ask for the body of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}But Pilate was surprised to hear that he had already died. So he sent for the officer, and asked if he were already dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}and, on learning from the officer that it was so, he gave the corpse to Joseph.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Joseph, having bought a linen sheet, took Jesus down, and wound the sheet around him, and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of the rock; and then rolled a stone up against the entrance of the tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Mary of Magdala and Mary, the mother of Joseph, were watching to see where he was laid.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Risen Life Announced

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}When the Sabbath was over, Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought some spices, so that they might go and anoint the body of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Very early on the first day of the week they went to the tomb, after sunrise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They were saying to one another, \uc1\u8220*Who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance of the tomb?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But, on looking up, they saw that the stone had already been rolled back; it was a very large one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Going into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on their right, in a white robe, and they were dismayed; but he said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*Do not be dismayed; you are looking for Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified; he has risen, he is not here! Look! Here is the place where they laid him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But go, and say to his disciples and to Peter \uc1\u8216*He is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They went out, and fled from the tomb, for they were trembling and bewildered; and they did not say a word to anyone, for they were frightened.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A late appendix

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs24 {\i (Inserted in some manuscripts from an ancient source)}

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After his rising again, early on the first day of the week, Jesus appeared first of all to Mary of Magdala, from whom he had driven out seven demons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}She went and told the news to those who had been with him and who were now in sorrow and tears;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}yet even they, when they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, did not believe it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Afterward, altered in appearance, he made himself known to two of them, as they were walking, on their way into the country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They also went and told the rest, but they did not believe even them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Later on, he made himself known to the Eleven themselves as they were at a meal, and reproached them with their want of faith and their stubbornness, because they did not believe those who had seen him after he had risen from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then he said to them, \uc1\u8220*Go into all the world, and proclaim the good news to all creation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who refuses to believe will be condemned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Moreover these signs will attend those who believe. In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new languages;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}they will take up snakes in their hands; and, if they drink any poison, it will not hurt them; they will place their hands on sick people and they will recover.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But they set out, and made the proclamation everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the message by the signs which attended it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Another appendix

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
But all that had been revealed to them they reported briefly to Peter and his companions. Afterward Jesus himself sent them out, from east to west, the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation.
\par}

}