{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Genesis (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 First Book of Moses

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Called

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Genesis

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Creation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the beginning when God created the heavens and the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the earth was still unformed and chaotic,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
with darkness on the surface of the abyss,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the spirit of God hovering over the waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}God said, \uc1\u8220*Let there be light,\uc1\u8221* and there was light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}God saw that the light was good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He separated the light from the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}calling the light \uc1\u8217*day\uc1\u8217* and the darkness \uc1\u8217*night\uc1\u8217*.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There was an evening and a morning, making the first day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*Let there be a dome between the waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and let it separate the waters from the waters.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So God made the dome to separate the waters below
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
from the waters which were above it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
It was so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}God called the dome the \uc1\u8217*sky\uc1\u8217*.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There was an evening and a morning, making the second day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*Let the waters under the sky be gathered together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and let the dry ground appear.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
It was so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}God called the dry ground \uc1\u8217*land\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and he called the gathered waters \uc1\u8217*seas\uc1\u8217*.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
God saw that it was good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}God said, \uc1\u8220*Let the earth put forth vegetation:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Plants on the earth which yield their own kind of seed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and trees that bear fruits in which are their own seed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
It was so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The earth sprouted vegetation:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
seed-bearing plants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and trees with seed-bearing fruit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
God saw that it was good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There was an evening and a morning, making the third day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*Let there be lights in the dome of the sky
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
to separate the night from the day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Let them be signs to mark the seasons, the days, and the years.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Let them be lights in the dome of the sky to light the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
It was so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So God made the two great lights:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The greater to rule the day and the lesser to rule the night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God made the stars also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He placed all these lights in the dome of the sky
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
to shed light upon the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}to rule over the day and over the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and to separate light from darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
God saw that it was good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There was an evening and a morning, making the fourth day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*Let the waters teem with living creatures,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and let birds fly over the earth in the open dome of the sky.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}God created the great sea monsters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
all kinds of living, moving creatures with which the waters teem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and all kinds of winged birds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
God saw that it was good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He blessed them, saying, \uc1\u8220*Be fruitful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
increase, fill the oceans,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and let the birds increase on the land.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}There was an evening and a morning, making the fifth day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*Let the earth produce all kinds of living creatures:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
cattle and reptiles and wild beasts.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
It was so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So God made all the different kinds of wild beasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the cattle, and everything that crawls upon the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
God saw that it was good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*Let us make humans who are images of us, who are like us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Let them rule over the fish of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the birds of the sky, the cattle, the wild beasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and all the reptiles that crawl upon the ground.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So God created humans in his image,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
he created them in the image of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
He created them male and female.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then God blessed them, and said to them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Be fruitful, grow in number,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
fill the earth and govern it;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
rule over the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and over every living thing that crawls on the ground,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}God said, \uc1\u8220*I give you every seed-bearing plant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
throughout all the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and every tree that has seed-bearing fruit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They will be food for you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and to every wild beast and to every bird of the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and to everything that crawls on the earth -
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
everything with the breath of life in it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I give every green plant for food.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
It was so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When God saw all that he had made,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he perceived that it was very good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There was an evening and a morning, making the sixth day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}So the heavens and the earth were finished, and everything in them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When on the seventh day God finished the work which he had done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he rested that day from all his work.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}God blessed the seventh day and set it apart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
for in it he rested from all the creative work which he had done.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The garden

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}This is the story of the heavens and earth when they were created.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
At the time when the {\scaps Lord} God made earth and heaven,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}there were not yet any plants on the earth, and no vegetation had sprung up; for the {\scaps Lord} God had not sent rain upon the earth, and there was no one to till the soil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}A mist used to rise from the earth and water all the surface of the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then the {\scaps Lord} God molded a human being out of dust taken from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and he became a living being.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} God planted a garden in Eden, far in the East; and placed the human he had formed there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}From the soil the {\scaps Lord} God made grow all kinds of trees that are pleasant to look at and good for food, with the tree of life also in the middle of the garden and the tree that gives the knowledge of good and evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}A river flowed out of Eden and watered the garden, and from there branched into four.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The name of the first is Pishon, which flows round the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The gold of that land is pure and there is aromatic gum and the onyx stone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The name of the second river is Gihon, which flows around the whole land of Cush,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and the name of the third river is the Tigris, which heads toward the east of Asshur. The fourth river is the Euphrates.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the {\scaps Lord} God took the human and placed him in the garden of Eden to till it and to care for it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} God also gave the human this command: \uc1\u8220*You may freely eat from every tree of the garden,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}except from the tree that gives the knowledge of good and evil; from this you must not eat, for on the day that you eat from it you will surely die.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then the {\scaps Lord} God said, \uc1\u8220*It is not good for the human to be alone; I will make a helper suited to him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So out of the ground the {\scaps Lord} God formed all the wild beasts and birds, and made them come to the human to see what he would call them. Whatever he called each living creature, that was its name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So the human, Adam gave names to all cattle and all the wild birds and beasts. But there was no companion suitable for him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then the {\scaps Lord} God caused the human to fall into a deep sleep, and while he slept, he took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}With the rib which he had taken from the human, the {\scaps Lord} built up a woman and brought her to the human.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then the human said, \uc1\u8220*This now is bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh. She will be called Woman, for from man she was taken.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For this reason a man leaves his father and his mother and clings to his wife, and the two become one flesh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}The man and his wife were both naked, yet felt no shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Now the snake was craftier than any other wild beast that the {\scaps Lord} God had made. It said to the woman, \uc1\u8220*Has God really said, \uc1\u8216*You must not eat from any tree of the garden\uc1\u8217*?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The woman answered, \uc1\u8220*We are allowed to eat the fruit of all the trees of the garden;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}it is only about the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden that God has said, \uc1\u8216*You must not eat from it, nor should you touch it, for if you do, you will die.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the snake said to the woman, \uc1\u8220*You will not die!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God knows that on the day you eat some of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like gods, knowing what is good and what is evil.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, attractive to look at and desirable for acquiring wisdom, she took some of its fruit and ate. Then she gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized that they were naked, so they sewed fig-leaves together to cover themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But when they heard the sound of the {\scaps Lord} God walking in the garden in the evening breeze, the man and his wife hid from him among the garden trees.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When the {\scaps Lord} God called to the man, \uc1\u8220*Where are you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}he replied, \uc1\u8220*I heard you in the garden and I was afraid, because I was naked, so I hid myself.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} God said, \uc1\u8220*Who told you that you were naked? Did you eat from the tree from which I ordered you not to eat?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The man answered, \uc1\u8220*The woman you placed beside me, she gave me fruit from the tree and I ate.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} God said to the woman, \uc1\u8220*What is this that you have done?\uc1\u8221* The woman replied, \uc1\u8220*The snake deceived me, and I ate.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the {\scaps Lord} God said to the snake:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Because you have done this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you will be more accursed than all cattle
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and all the wild beasts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
You will crawl on your belly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and eat dust
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
all your life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will establish hostility between you and the woman,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
between your offspring and hers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who will wound your head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and you will wound their heel.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To the woman he said,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I will greatly increase your anguished toil in pregnancy;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
with pain will you bear children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
You will yearn for your husband,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but he will rule over you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}To Adam he said,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Because you have listened to the voice of your wife,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and ate from the tree
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
about which I ordered you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8217*You must never eat from it\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the ground will be cursed because of you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as long as you live, you will earn a living only by anguished toil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The ground will always bring forth thorns and thistles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and you will eat the plants of the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}By the sweat of your brow you will eat bread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
until you return to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for from it you were taken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for dust you are,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and to dust you will return!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The man, Adam, named his wife Eve{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Heb Havvah, that is, Life. }; because she was the mother of all living people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The {\scaps Lord} God made clothes from animal skins for Adam and his wife and dressed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then the {\scaps Lord} God said: \uc1\u8220*The man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil. He must not reach out his hand, and take also from the tree of life, and eat, and live forever.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So the {\scaps Lord} God sent him out of the garden of Eden, to till the ground from which he had been taken.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}He drove out Adam and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden the cherubim, and the blazing whirling sword, to bar the way to the tree of life.        
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Cain and Abel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Adam lay with his wife Eve and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain, and she said, \uc1\u8220*I have created a man with the help of the {\scaps Lord}!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}She also gave birth to his brother Abel. Abel was a shepherd, while Cain was a farmer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the course of time Cain brought some of the ground\uc1\u8217*s produce as an offering to the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Abel too brought some of the choicest animals of his flock and sacrificed their fat pieces. The {\scaps Lord} looked with approval on Abel and his offering{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}but he could not receive Cain and his offering with approval.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Cain burned with anger and his face fell.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So the {\scaps Lord} said to Cain, \uc1\u8220*Why are you angry and why do you scowl?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If you do what is right and good, can\uc1\u8217*t you hold your head up high? But if you do wrong, sin crouches at the door and longs to have you, but you must master it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Cain said to his brother Abel, \uc1\u8220*Let us go into the field.\uc1\u8221* While they were there, Cain attacked his brother and killed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the {\scaps Lord} asked Cain, \uc1\u8220*Where is your brother Abel?\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*I do not know! Am I my brother\uc1\u8217*s keeper?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*What have you done?\uc1\u8221* the {\scaps Lord} replied, \uc1\u8220*Listen! Your brother\uc1\u8217*s blood is crying out to me from the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Even now you are cursed by the very ground that has opened to receive your brother\uc1\u8217*s blood shed by your hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}From now on when you till the ground, it will no longer yield its best to you. You will be a vagabond and a wandering refugee upon the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then Cain said to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8220*My punishment is too much for me to bear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Look! Today you banish me from the ground. I must hide in your presence. I will be a wandering refugee upon the earth, and whoever finds me will kill me!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But the {\scaps Lord} said to him, \uc1\u8220*If any one kills you, the crime shall be avenged sevenfold.\uc1\u8221* So the {\scaps Lord} placed a distinctive mark on Cain, to keep any one who found him from killing him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Cain departed from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s presence and lived east of Eden in the land of Wandering.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Cain lay with his wife. She became pregnant, giving birth to Enoch. Cain built a city, and named it after his son Enoch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad fathered Mehujael, and Mehujael fathered Methushael, and Methushael fathered Lamech.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Lamech\uc1\u8217*s vengence

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Lamech took two wives; the name of one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Adah gave birth to Jabal, who became the ancestor of the people who live in tents and have cattle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}His brother\uc1\u8217*s name was Jubal; he was the ancestor of the people who play the harp and flute.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As for Zillah, she gave birth to Tubal-cain, who forged all sort of tools from copper and iron. The sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Lamech said to his wives:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Adah and Zillah, hear my voice;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
wives of Lamech, listen to my speech;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because I have slain a man for wounding me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and a young man for bruising me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}If Cain is to be avenged sevenfold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
then Lamech will be seventy and sevenfold.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Adam lay with his wife again and she bore a son. She named him Seth: \uc1\u8220*because God gave me another son for Abel, who was killed by Cain.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Seth too had a son. He named him Enosh. That was when people began worshipping in the name of {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}This is the list of the descendants of Adam. On the day that God created human beings, he made them in his own image.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He created them male and female created, and blessed them, and called their name Adam.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Adam lived for a hundred and thirty years, and had a son in his own likeness, after his image; and named him Seth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Adam lived for eight hundred years after he had Seth; and he had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In total, Adam lived for nine hundred and thirty years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Seth lived for a hundred and five years, and fathered Enosh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Seth lived a further eight hundred and seven years after he had Enosh, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In total, Seth lived for nine hundred and twelve years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Enosh lived for ninety years, and fathered Kenan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Enosh lived a further eight hundred and fifteen years after he had Kenan, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In total, Enosh lived for nine hundred and five years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Kenan lived for seventy years, and fathered Mahalalel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Kenan lived for eight hundred and forty years after he had Mahalalel, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In total, Kenan lived for nine hundred and ten years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Mahalalel lived for sixty and five years, and fathered Jared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Mahalalel lived for eight hundred and thirty years after he had Jared, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In total, Mahalalel lived for eight hundred ninety and five years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Jared lived for a hundred sixty and two years, and fathered Enoch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jared lived for eight hundred years after he had Enoch, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In total, Jared lived for nine hundred sixty and two years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Enoch lived for sixty and five years, and fathered Methuselah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Enoch walked with God for three hundred years after he had Methuselah, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}In total, Enoch lived for three hundred sixty and five years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Enoch walked with God, and then he was gone; because God took him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Methuselah lived for a hundred eighty and seven years, and fathered Lamech.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Methuselah lived for seven hundred eighty and two years after he had Lamech, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}In total, Methuselah lived for nine hundred sixty and nine years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Lamech lived for a hundred eighty and two years, and had a son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}He named him Noah, saying: \uc1\u8220*He will bring us relief from our work and the toil of our hands which comes from the ground the {\scaps Lord} cursed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Lamech lived for five hundred ninety and five years after he had Noah, and had sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}In total, Lamech lived for seven hundred seventy and seven years; and then he died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}When Noah was five hundred years old, he fathered Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The divine beings and the beautiful daughters

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}When people began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}some of the heavenly beings saw that the daughters of humans were beautiful; and they took them as wives, whoever they chose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But the {\scaps Lord} said: \uc1\u8220*My spirit shall not abide in people forever, because they are flesh; therefore they will live for only a hundred and twenty years.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The Nephilim were on the earth in those days (and later too) when the heavenly beings lay with the human daughters who had their children. These were the mighty heroes of old, men of renown.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The flood

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When the {\scaps Lord} saw that people\uc1\u8217*s wickedness was increasing in the world, and that the trend of their thoughts was at all times toward evil,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}he was greatly grieved and regretted that he had made people on the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore the {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*I will destroy all living beings from off the ground \uc1\u8212* people, animals, creeping things, and birds \uc1\u8212* because I regret that I have made them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But Noah had won the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s favor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This is the story of Noah. Among the people of his time, Noah was righteous and wholehearted; Noah walked with God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}God saw that the earth was corrupt and full of violence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}God looked at the earth and saw that it was corrupt; all living things on the earth had become corrupt in their ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So God said to Noah, \uc1\u8220*I have determined to put an end to all living beings, for the earth is filled with their acts of injustice; I am going to destroy them from the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Make yourself an ark of cypress wood. Construct rooms in the ark, and coat it within and without with pitch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This is how you shall build it: the length of the ark shall be five hundred feet, its breadth eighty feet, and its height fifty feet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Make a roof for it and place the door on the side. Construct it with lower, second, and third storeys.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For I am about to bring floods of water upon the earth to destroy from under heaven every living thing in which is the breath of life; every thing that is on the earth shall die.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*But I will make a solemn agreement with you. Go into the ark with your sons, your wife and their wives,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and take with you into the ark two of every kind living thing, a male and a female,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}birds, animals and creeping things, so that they might be kept alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Take and store food for them and you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Noah did all this. He did everything that God told him to.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Then the {\scaps Lord} said to Noah, \uc1\u8220*Enter with all your household into the ark; for I see that in this age you are living before me an upright life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Take seven of all the beasts that are fit for food and sacrifice, the male and the female; but of the beasts that are not fit for food and sacrifice take only two, the male and the female;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and of the wild birds that are fit for food and sacrifice take seven, to keep the species alive on the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}After seven days I will send rain on the earth forty days and forty nights; and I will destroy from the surface of the ground every living thing that I have made.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Noah did all that the {\scaps Lord} commanded him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He was six hundred years old, and when the waters of the flood came upon the earth{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}he, his sons, his wife, and his sons\uc1\u8217* wives, entered the ark because of the waters of the flood{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}together with the beasts that were fit for food and sacrifice and the beasts that were not fit, and the birds, and everything that creeps upon the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Two by two, male and female, they entered the ark as God had commanded Noah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}After seven days, the flood waters came.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In the six hundredth year of Noah\uc1\u8217*s life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on that very day, all the fountains of the great deep burst open, and the windows of heaven were opened \uc1\u8212* and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}it rained for forty days and forty nights.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}That was the day that Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah\uc1\u8217*s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, went into the ark, and{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}every type of animal, and cattle, and creeping thing that creeps on the earth, and bird{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}went with Noah into the ark, two by two of every kind of living thing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They went in, male and female, as God had commanded Noah; and the {\scaps Lord} shut Noah in the ark.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The flood continued for forty days, and the waters increased and raised up the ark, and it was lifted high above the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}It floated on the surface as the waters rose higher over the land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Higher the waters rose over the land \uc1\u8212* until the highest mountains were covered{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}by more than twenty feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}All creatures on the land, bird and cattle and animals, every creature that swarms on the ground, every person,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}everything on dry land in whose nostrils was the breath of life, died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The {\scaps Lord} destroyed everything that existed upon the face of the ground, both man and cattle, and creeping things, and the birds of the heavens, and Noah only was left and they who were with him in the ark.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The waters did not start to go down for a hundred and fifty days.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Then God remembered Noah and all the beasts and all the animals that were with him in the ark; and God caused a wind to blow over the earth, and the flood subsided,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the fountains of the deed were stopped and the windows of heaven closed, and the rain from heaven ceased,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and the waters withdrew more and more from the land for a hundred and fifty days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The waters continued to go down until, on the first day of the tenth month, the tops of the mountains could be seen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After forty days Noah opened the window of the ark,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and sent out a raven; and it kept going to and fro until the waters were dried up from the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He also sent out a dove to see if the waters had subsided from the surface of the ground;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but the dove found no rest for her foot, and so returned to him to the ark, for the waters covered the surface of the whole earth. So he reached out his hand and took her and brought her back into the ark.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then he waited seven days longer and again sent out the dove from the ark.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The dove came in to him at dusk and in her mouth was a freshly plucked olive-leaf. So Noah knew that the waters had subsided from the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He waited seven days more and sent out the dove; but it did not return to him again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So it was that in the first day of the first month of Noah\uc1\u8217*s six hundred and first year, the waters had dried up. Noah removed the covering of the ark and looked, and saw that the surface of the ground was dry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was the twenty-seventh day of the second month.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}God said to Noah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*Leave the ark with your wife and sons and their wives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Bring out every living creature, every bird, cattle, and creeping thing that creeps on the earth, so that they can spread over the earth, and be fruitful and multiply.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So Noah left the ark with his sons and his wife and his son\uc1\u8217*s wives,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and every living creature, every creeping thing, every bird came out one kind after another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Noah built an altar to the {\scaps Lord} and took one of every beast and bird that was fit for sacrifice and offered burnt-offerings on the altar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When the {\scaps Lord} smelled the pleasing odour, he said to himself, \uc1\u8220*I will never again curse the ground because of people because the inclination of their heart is evil from their youth, nor will I again destroy every living thing, as I have done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, shall not cease.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Then God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, \uc1\u8220*Bear children and multiply and repopulate the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Every wild beast and bird and everything that creeps on the ground and all the fish of the sea shall fear and dread you; into your hand they are given.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you; as I gave the green herbs, I give them all to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Only you shall not eat flesh while the life is in it, that is, the blood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Moreover, your own life-blood will I require for a person\uc1\u8217*s life; from every beast will I require it, and from everyone who takes another\uc1\u8217*s life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Whoever sheds a person\uc1\u8217*s blood, by people shall their blood be shed; for God made people in his own image.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But you are to bear children and repopulate the whole earth and subdue it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}God also said to Noah and to his sons with him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*Now I make this solemn agreement with you and with your descendants{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and with every living creature that is with you, with the birds, the cattle, and every wild animal that is with you of all that have gone out of the ark, even with every beast of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This is my solemn agreement: No living thing will ever again be cut off by the waters of the flood, and there will never again be a flood to destroy the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}God said, \uc1\u8220*This is the symbol of the solemn agreement that I make for all time between me and you and every living creature that is with you:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I have placed my bow in the cloud and it shall be the symbol of the solemn agreement between me and the inhabitants of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth and the bow is seen in the cloud,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will remember the agreement which is between me and you and every living creature; and the waters shall never again become a flood to destroy all living things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Whenever the bow is seen in the cloud, I will see it and remember the everlasting agreement between God and every living creature on earth,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}God said to Noah, \uc1\u8220*it is the sign of the solemn agreement which I have made with everything that lives on earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The sons of Noah, who left the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth; and Ham was the father of Canaan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The descendants of these three sons of Noah spread over the whole earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Noah and the first vineyard

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Now Noah, the farmer, was the first to plant a vineyard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When he drank the wine he became drunk, and lay uncovered in his tent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father and told his two brothers about it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But Shem and Japheth took a garment and laid it upon both their shoulders and went backward to cover the nakedness of their father, their faces being turned away so that they did not see their father\uc1\u8217*s nakedness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When Noah awoke from his wine and learned what his youngest son had done to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}he said,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Cursed be Canaan;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
may he be a slave of slaves to his brothers.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Also he said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Blessed of the {\scaps Lord} be Shem;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and let Canaan be a slave to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}God enlarge Japheth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and let him live in the tents of Shem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Let Canaan be a slave to him as well.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}All the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years; and he died.{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Now these are the descendants of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and to them were sons born after the flood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The sons of Javan: Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}From the descendants of these were the peoples of the coasts and islands divided in their lands, every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabteca; and the sons of Raamah: Sheba, and Dedan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Cush fathered Nimrod; he began to be known as a mighty one in the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He was a mighty hunter before the {\scaps Lord}; which is why people say: \uc1\u8220*Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and Rehoboth-ir, and Calah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and Resen between Nineveh and Calah \uc1\u8212* which is the great city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Mizraim fathered Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and Pathrusim, and Casluhim \uc1\u8212* from whom went forth the Philistines \uc1\u8212* and Caphtorim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Canaan fathered Zidon his firstborn, and Heth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite; and afterward were the families of the Canaanite spread abroad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The border of the Canaanite was from Zidon, as you go toward Gerar, to Gaza; as you go toward Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim, to Lasha.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, in their nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}To Shem, the father of all the children of Eber, the elder brother of Japheth, to him also were children born.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The sons of Aram: Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Arpachshad fathered Shelah; and Shelah fathered Eber.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}To Eber were born two sons; the name of the one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother\uc1\u8217*s name was Joktan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Joktan fathered Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab; all these were the sons of Joktan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Their settlements were from Mesha, as you go toward Sephar, to the mountain of the east.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations; and of these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Babel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}All the inhabitants of the earth had one language and vocabulary;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and as they travelled westward, they found a broad valley in the land of Shinar, and made their home there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then they said one to another, \uc1\u8220*Come, let us make bricks and thoroughly bake them.\uc1\u8221* So they had bricks for stone and asphalt for mortar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They said, \uc1\u8220*Come, let us build ourselves a city, and a tower whose top will touch the heavens. We will make a landmark, so that we are not scattered over all the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But when the {\scaps Lord} came down to see the city and tower that people had built,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}he said, \uc1\u8220*See, they are one people and all have one language. This is only the beginning of their activity, and now nothing that they propose to do will seem too difficult for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Come, let us go down there and confuse their language, so that they do not understand each other\uc1\u8217*s speech.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So the {\scaps Lord} scattered them from there over all the earth; and they ceased building the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}That is why they named it Babel{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Confusion }, for there the {\scaps Lord} confused the language of all the inhabitants of earth and scattered them over the whole world.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}These are the descendants of Shem. Shem was a hundred years old, and fathered Arpachshad two years after the flood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Shem lived for five hundred years after he fathered Arpachshad, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Arpachshad lived for five and thirty years, and fathered Shelah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Arpachshad lived for four hundred and three years after he fathered Shelah, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Shelah lived for thirty years, and fathered Eber.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Shelah lived for four hundred and three years after he fathered Eber, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Eber lived for four and thirty years, and fathered Peleg.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Eber lived for four hundred and thirty years after he fathered Peleg, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Peleg lived for thirty years, and fathered Reu.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Peleg lived for two hundred and nine years after he fathered Reu, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Reu lived for two and thirty years, and fathered Serug.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Reu lived for two hundred and seven years after he fathered Serug, and fathered sons and daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Serug lived for thirty years, and fathered Nahor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Serug lived for two hundred years after he fathered Nahor, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Nahor lived for nine and twenty years, and fathered Terah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Nahor lived for a hundred and nineteen years after he fathered Terah, and fathered sons and daughters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Terah lived for seventy years, and fathered Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Now these are the descendants of Terah. Terah fathered Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran fathered Lot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Haran died in the presence of his father Terah in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Abram and Nahor took wives: the name of Abram\uc1\u8217*s wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor\uc1\u8217*s wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Sarai was barren; she had no child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his son\uc1\u8217*s son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram\uc1\u8217*s wife; and they went from Ur of the Chaldees, to go to the land of Canaan; and they nt to Haran, and dwelt there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}In total, Terah lived for two hundred and five years; and died in Haran.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Abram\uc1\u8217*s Journey

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}The {\scaps Lord} said to Abram, \uc1\u8220*Go from your country, your relatives and your father\uc1\u8217*s house to the land that I will show you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will make of you a great nation; and I will surely bless you and make your name famous, so that you will be a blessing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse those who curse you, and all the families of the earth shall ask for themselves a blessing like your own.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Abram set out, as the {\scaps Lord} had commanded him; and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He took Sarai his wife and Lot his brother\uc1\u8217*s son and all the slaves that they had acquired in Haran, and started for the land of Canaan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Abram passed through the land to a place called Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. At that time the Canaanites lived there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} appeared to Abram and said, \uc1\u8220*To your descendants I will give this land.\uc1\u8221* There Abram built an altar to the {\scaps Lord} who had appeared to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}From there he moved on to the hill at the east of Bethel and pitched his tent with Bethel on the west and Ai on the east, and there too he built an altar to the {\scaps Lord} and prayed to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Abram moved on, going from place to place toward the Nagreb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}There was a famine in the land, so Abram went down to Egypt to live there; because the famine was severe in the land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to Sarai his wife, \uc1\u8220*You are a beautiful woman;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so that when the Egyptians see you, they will say, \uc1\u8216*She is his wife\uc1\u8217*; and they will kill me, but let you live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Say you are my sister, so that everything may go well for me because of you and my life will be spared.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Abram arrived in Egypt, the Egyptians saw that Serai was very beautiful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The officials of Pharaoh, when they saw her, praised her to Pharaoh, and she was taken into Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s household.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He treated Abram well for her sake. He had sheep, and oxen and donkeys, and male and female slaves, and she-donkeys, and camels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the {\scaps Lord} sent great plagues to Pharaoh and his household because of Sarai, Abram\uc1\u8217*s wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Pharaoh called Abram and said, \uc1\u8220*What is this that you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Why did you say, \uc1\u8216*She is my sister,\uc1\u8217* so that I took her to be my wife? Here she is, take her and go.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Pharaoh gave his men orders to send him on his way with his wife and all his possessions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}So Abram and his wife and all his possessions left Egypt and went to the Negreb and Lot went with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Abram was now very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He journeyed on from the Negreb in stages towards Bethel, to the place where he had earlier pitched his tent between Bethel and Ai{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and had set up the alter to worship the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Lot, who went with Abram, also had so many flocks and herds and tents{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}that the land was not fertile enough to support them both. They had too many animals to live in the same place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}At that time, the Canaanites and Perizzites were living in the land. So when there was a quarrel between Lot\uc1\u8217*s herdsmen and Abram\uc1\u8217*s herdsmen,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Abram said to Lot, \uc1\u8220*There should be no quarrels between me and you, or between my herdsmen and yours, because we are relatives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Is not the whole land before you? Let\uc1\u8217*s separate. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; or if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Lot looked about and saw that all the plain of the Jordan, as far as Zoar, was well watered everywhere, like a garden of the {\scaps Lord}. (This was before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So Lot chose for himself all the valley of the Jordan and went on to the east; and they separated from one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Abram lived in the land of Canaan and Lot lived in the cities of the plain and moved his tent as far as Sodom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}(But the men of Sodom were very wicked and sinned against the {\scaps Lord}.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} said to Abram, after Lot had gone away from him, \uc1\u8220*Lift up your eyes and look from the place where you are northward, southward, eastward and westward,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for all the land that you see I will give to you and to your descendants forever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will make your descendants as many as the dust of the earth, so that if someone could count the dust of the earth, then your descendants could also be counted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Rise, walk through the length and breadth of the land, for I will give it to you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Abram moved his tent and lived in the oak grove of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Victory over the Four Eastern Kings

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}I n the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}they went to war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}All these joined forces together in the valley of Siddim (that is, the Dead Sea).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For twelve years they had been subject to Chedorlaonier, but in the thirteenth year they had rebelled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So in the fourteenth year Chedorlaonier, and the kings that were with him, came and defeated the Rephaim in Ashteroth-Karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh-Kiriathaim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and the Horites in their hill country of Seir, to El-Paran, which is on the edge of the wilderness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then they returned and came to En-Mishpat (that is, Kadesh), and laid waste all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, who lived in Hazazon-Tamar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So the king of Sodom went out together with the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar); and they set themselves in battle array against them in the valley of Siddim;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings against the five.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now the valley of Siddim is full of bitumen pits; so when the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, they fell into them, but those who remained fled to the mountain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their provisions and went their way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They also took Lot, Abram\uc1\u8217*s brother\uc1\u8217*s son, who was living in Sodom, and his goods and departed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But one who had escaped came and told Abram the Hebrew. Now he was living by the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner, and these were supporters of Abram.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Abram heard that his kinsman had been taken captive, he led forth his trained men, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued as far as Dan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then, dividing his band in order to attack the kings by night, he with his servants attacked them, and pursued them to Hobah, which is north of Damascus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So he brought back all the goods, and also his kinsman Lot, with his goods, as well as the women and the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after his return from the defeat of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, at the valley of Shaveh (that is, the King\uc1\u8217*s Vale).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Melchizedek king of Salem also brought out bread and wine; and he was priest of God Most High.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He blessed him saying:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Blessed be Abram before God Most High,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
possessor of heaven and earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Blessed be God Most High,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
who has delivered your foes into your power.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
Then Abram gave him a tenth of everything.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The king of Sodom said to Abram, \uc1\u8220*Give me my people, and take the goods for yourself.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Abram said to the king of Sodom, \uc1\u8220*I have lifted up my hand to the {\scaps Lord}, God Most High, Possessor of heaven and earth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}that I would not take a thread nor a sandal-thong nor anything that is yours, so that you could not say, \uc1\u8216*I have made Abram rich.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}By no means! Only that which the servants have eaten, and the portion of the men who went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre \uc1\u8212* let them take their portion.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Abram\uc1\u8217*s vision

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}After these things God spoke to Abram in a vision saying, \uc1\u8220*Do not be afraid, Abram, I am your shield. Your reward will be exceedingly great.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But Abram said, \uc1\u8220*Lord {\scaps God}, what can you give me? I am childless, and the person who will be possessor of my house is Eliezer of Damascus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}to me you have given no offspring, and, so a slave born in my house is my heir.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The word of the {\scaps Lord} came to him, \uc1\u8220*This man will not be your heir, but a child of your own will be your heir.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then God brought him outside and said, \uc1\u8220*Look now toward heaven and count the stars, if you are able to count them! So will your descendants be.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Abram believed in the {\scaps Lord}; and the {\scaps Lord} reckoned it to him as righteousness,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and said to him, \uc1\u8220*I am the {\scaps Lord} who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give to you this land to inherit it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Abram said, \uc1\u8220*Lord {\scaps God}, how will I know that I will inherit it?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} said to him, \uc1\u8220*Bring me a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle dove, and a young pigeon.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Abram brought him all these, and divided them in the middle, and laid each half over against the other; but the birds he did not divide.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The birds of prey came down upon the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a horror of great darkness fell on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} said to Abram, \uc1\u8220*Know certainly that your descendants will be foreigners in a land that is not theirs, and will be slaves there; and they will be held there for four hundred years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But I will judge that nation, whom they will serve, and afterward they will come out with many goods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But you will go to your fathers in peace; you will be buried in a good old age.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In the fourth generation they return here again; for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When the sun had set and it was dark, there appeared a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch that passed between the pieces of the animals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}At that time the {\scaps Lord} made a solemn agreement with Abram, saying, \uc1\u8220*To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}(This includes the lands of the Kenite, the Kenizzite, the Kadmonite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Rephaim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Girgashite, and Jebusite).
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Hagar and Ishmael

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Now Sarai, Abram\uc1\u8217*s wife, had borne him no children, but she had an Egyptian slave-girl whose name was Hagar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Sarai said to Abram, \uc1\u8220*the {\scaps Lord} has denied me children; Take my slave-girl; maybe I will obtain children by her.\uc1\u8221* Then Abram listened to her{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}so she took Hagar the Egyptian, her slave-girl, after Abram had lived for ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and Abram lay with Hagar, and she conceived. When she saw that she had conceived, she looked with contempt on her mistress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Sarai complained to Abram, \uc1\u8220*May the wrong I suffer be on you! I myself gave my slave-girl to you; and now that she sees that she has conceived, I am despised by her; may the {\scaps Lord} judge between me and you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But Abram said to Sarai, \uc1\u8220*Your maid-servant is in your power, do to her whatever seems right to you.\uc1\u8221* Then Sarai ill-treated her so that she fled from her presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The messenger of the {\scaps Lord} found her by a spring of water in the wilderness, by the spring in the way to Shur.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He said, \uc1\u8220*Hagar, Sarai\uc1\u8217*s slave-girl, where have you come from? And where are you going?\uc1\u8221* She said, \uc1\u8220*I am fleeing from the presence of mistress Sarai.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} said to her, \uc1\u8220*Return to your mistress and submit yourself to her authority.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Moreover the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} said to her, \uc1\u8220*I will make your descendants so many that they can not be numbered because they are so numerous.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The messenger of the {\scaps Lord} also said to her, \uc1\u8220*You are pregnant, and will have a son; you must call him Ishmael God hears, because the {\scaps Lord} has heard of your ill-treatment.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He shall be like a wild donkey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
his hand against every man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and every man\uc1\u8217*s hand against him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and he will live at odds with all his relatives.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then she called the name of the {\scaps Lord}, who had spoken to her, El-roi (You are a God who sees me); for she said, \uc1\u8220*Have I seen God and am I still alive after I have looked upon him?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore the well is called Beer-lahai-roi{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Well of the living One who sees me }, ( it is between Kadesh and Bered){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram named his son, whom Hagar bore, Ishmael.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Abram was eighty-six years old, when Hagar bore Ishmael.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Abram becomes Abraham

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the {\scaps Lord} revealed himself to Abram and said to him, \uc1\u8220*I am God Almighty, walk before me and be blameless{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and I will make my solemn agreement between me and you and will make your descendants exceedingly numerous.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Abram fell on his face; and God talked with him, saying{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*I make this solemn promise to you: you will be the father of a multitude of nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Neither will your name any longer be Abram, but your name will be Abraham; for I will make you the father of a multitude of nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and will make nations of you, and kings shall spring from you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will establish my solemn agreement between me and you and your descendants after your throughout their generations, an everlasting covenant, to be a God to you and to your descendants after you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will give to you, and to your descendants after your, the land where you are now foreigners, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Circumcision

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God also said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*As for you, you must keep the requirements of my solemn agreement, you, and your descendants after you throughout their generations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This is my solemn agreement, which you must keep, between me and you and your descendants after you: every male among you must be circumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Whenever you are circumcised, the flesh of your foreskin shall be a sign of a solemn agreement between me and you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Every male when he is eight days old, must be circumcised throughout your generations, whether he is born in the house, or bought with money from any foreigner who is not of your offspring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The slave who is born in your house and the one who is bought with your money must be circumcised. The sign of my solemn agreement will be in your flesh \uc1\u8212* an everlasting agreement.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As for the uncircumcised male, who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that one will be cut off from his people; he has broken my solemn agreement.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Sarai becomes Sarah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then God said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*As for Sarai your wife, do not call her name Sarai, but Sarah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will bless her, and will give you a son from her: I will bless her, and she will become the mother of nations; kings of peoples will descend from her.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Abraham fell on his face and laughed, and said to himself. \uc1\u8220*Will a child be born to one who is an hundred years old? Will Sarah who is ninety years old bear children?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Abraham said to God, \uc1\u8220*If only Ishmael might live with your blessing!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But God said, \uc1\u8220*No. But Sarah your wife is about to bear your a son; call him Isaac. I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant for his descendants after him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}However I have heard you regarding Ishmael: I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful and his descendants exceedingly many. Twelve princes he will father, and I will make him a great nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to you at this appointed time next year.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When he had finished talking with him, God left Abraham.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Abraham and Isaac\uc1\u8217*s circumcision

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all who were born in his house, and all who were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham\uc1\u8217*s house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin that very same day, as God had said to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Now Abraham was ninety-nine years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}On this very same day was Abraham circumcised, with Ishmael his son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}All the men of his house, those born in the house and those bought with money from foreigners, were circumcised with him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The guests at the oaks of Mamre

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}The {\scaps Lord} also appeared to Abraham by the oaks of Mamre, as he was sitting at the entrance of his tent in the heat of the day;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, as he looked up, three men stood there before him. As soon as he saw them, he ran from the entrance of his tent to meet them and bowed to the ground{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and said, \uc1\u8220*Sirs, if you are willing to do me a favor, do not, I beg of you, pass by your servant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Since you have come to your servant, let a little water be brought, so that you may wash your feet, and lie down under the tree.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And let me bring some food, so that you may refresh yourselves; afterward you may go on your way.\uc1\u8221* They replied, \uc1\u8220*Do as you have said.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Abraham hastened to Sarah\uc1\u8217*s tent and said, \uc1\u8220*Make ready quickly four measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Abraham also ran to the herd, and took a calf that was tender and good, and gave it to the servant, and he prepared it quickly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Abraham took curd and milk, with the calf that he had prepared, and served them; and he waited on them under the tree, while they ate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then they said to him, \uc1\u8220*Where is your wife?\uc1\u8221* He said, \uc1\u8220*There, within the tent.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}One of them said, \uc1\u8220*I will surely return to you about nine months from now, and then, Sarah your wife shall have a son.\uc1\u8221*But Sarah was listening behind the door of the tent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now Sarah and Abraham were advanced in years;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so she laughed to herself, saying, \uc1\u8220*After I and my husband are so old will I have pleasure?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But the {\scaps Lord} said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*Why did Sarah laugh, saying, \uc1\u8216*Will I, indeed, even when I am old give birth to a child?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Is anything too wonderful for the {\scaps Lord}? At the appointed time about nine months from now, I will return to you and Sarah shall have a son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Sarah was frightened and denied that she had laughed, but he said \uc1\u8220*Yes, you laughed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then the men started from there and looked off in the direction of Sodom; and Abraham went along with them to start them on their way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}the {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*Should I conceal from Abraham that which I am about to do,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}since Abraham will become a great and mighty nation and all the nations of the earth will want a blessing like his for themselves?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For I have chosen him in order that he may teach his sons and his household after him, and that they may keep the way of the {\scaps Lord}, by doing righteousness and justice, so that the {\scaps Lord} may bring on Abraham that which he has promised concerning him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Sodom and Gomorrah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*The complaint has come that the people of Sodom and Gomorrah have committed great and terrible sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I will go down and see whether they have done exactly as the complaint comes to me; and if they have not, I will know.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As the men turned from there and went toward Sodom, Abraham remained standing before the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Abraham drew near to the {\scaps Lord} and said, \uc1\u8220*Will you sweep away the righteous with the wicked?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Suppose there are within the city fifty people who are righteous. Will you sweep it away and not forgive the place for sake of the fifty righteous who are in it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Far be it from you to do this: to slay the righteous with the wicked! And that the righteous should be treated as the wicked, far be it from you! Should not the Judge of all the earth do what is just?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*If I find in the city of Sodom fifty who are righteous, I will spare the whole place for their sake.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Abraham answered, \uc1\u8220*I have dared to speak to the {\scaps Lord}, even though I am but dust and ashes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Suppose there be five lacking of the fifty righteous. Will you sweep away all the city for lack of five?\uc1\u8221* The {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*I will not sweep it away, if I find forty-five there.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then Abraham spoke to him again, and said, \uc1\u8220*Suppose forty are found there?\uc1\u8221* He replied, \uc1\u8220*For the sake of forty I will not do it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then Abraham said, \uc1\u8220*Oh, let not the {\scaps Lord} be angry, but let me speak. Suppose thirty are found there?\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*I will not do it, if I find thirty there.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then Abraham said, \uc1\u8220*You see that I have dared to speak to the {\scaps Lord}. Suppose twenty are found there?\uc1\u8221* He replied, \uc1\u8220*For the sake of twenty I will not destroy it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Then Abraham said, \uc1\u8220*Oh, let not the {\scaps Lord} be angry, but let me speak just once more. Suppose ten are found there?\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*For the sake of the ten I will not destroy it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then the {\scaps Lord} went his way, and Abraham returned home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}Two messengers came to Sodom in the evening, as Lot was sitting at the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he rose up to meet them, and he bowed with his face to the earth{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and said, \uc1\u8220*Sirs, turn aside, I beg of you, into your servant\uc1\u8217*s house and spend the night and wash your feet; then you can rise up early and go on your way.\uc1\u8221* They said, \uc1\u8220*No, we will spend the night in the street.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But he urged them so strongly that they went with him and entered his house. He made a feast for them and baked bread made without yeast, and they ate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But before they had lain down, the people of Sodom, both young and old, all the people from every quarter, surrounded the house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They called out to Lot, \uc1\u8220*Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us so we can rape them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then Lot went out to them at the entrance of his house, but he shut the door after him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He said, \uc1\u8220*I beg of you, my friends, do not do what is wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}See, I have two unmarried daughters; let me bring them out to you, and do to them as you desire; only do nothing to these men, for they have come under the shadow of my roof.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But they replied, \uc1\u8220*Stand back!\uc1\u8221* And they added, \uc1\u8220*This one came in as a foreigner to live here, but now he would set himself up as a judge! We will treat you worse than them.\uc1\u8221* They pressed hard against Lot and advanced to break the door.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But the men reached out and drew Lot to them into the house and shut the door.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then they struck the men who were at the door of the house, both small and great, with blindness, so that they grew tired of searching for the door.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the men said to Lot, \uc1\u8220*Have you any one else here? Bring your sons-in-law, your sons, and daughters, and whoever you have in the city out of this place,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}for we are about to destroy it, because great complaint concerning the people has come to the {\scaps Lord} and he has sent us to destroy it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So Lot went out and said to his sons-in-law, \uc1\u8220*Up, go out of this place, for the {\scaps Lord} will destroy the city.\uc1\u8221* But his sons-in-law thought he was only jesting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When the dawn appeared, the messengers urged Lot, saying, \uc1\u8220*Get up, take your wife and your two daughters so that you may not be swept away in the punishment of the city.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When he hesitated, the men grabbed him by the hand and led him and his wife and his two daughters outside the city, for the {\scaps Lord} was merciful to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When they had brought them outside, they said, \uc1\u8220*Run for your life; do not look behind you nor stay anywhere in the plain. Escape to the heights, that you may not be swept away!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But Lot said to them, \uc1\u8220*Oh, sirs, not so!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}See, your servant has found favor with you, and you have shown great mercy to me in saving my life. I cannot escape to the heights, lest some evil overtake me, and I die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}See now, this village is near enough to run to, and it is small. Oh, let me escape there, and my life will be saved.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He answered, \uc1\u8220*I have also granted you this favor, in that I will not destroy the village of which you have spoken.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Make haste, escape to it, for I can do nothing until you arrive there.\uc1\u8221* Therefore the village was called Zoar{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Little }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The sun had risen when Lot came to Zoar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then the {\scaps Lord} caused brimstone and fire from heaven to rain upon Sodom and Gomorrah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and he destroyed those cities and all the plain, with all the people who lived in it and all that grew on the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But Lot\uc1\u8217*s wife, who was following him, looked back, and she became a pillar of salt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Early in the morning Abraham rose and went to the place where he had stood before the {\scaps Lord};{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and as he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah and all the plain, he saw the smoke of the land going up as the smoke of a smelting-furnace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}God had remembered Abraham when he destroyed the cities of the plain and rescued Lot from the destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Lot and his daughters

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then Lot went up from Zoar with his two daughters and lived in a cave on the heights, for he was afraid to stay in Zoar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The older daughter said to the younger, \uc1\u8220*Our father is old, and there is no one on the earth to come in to us after the manner of all the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Come let us make our father drink wine and we will lie with him, so that we can preserve our family through our father.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}So they made their father drink wine that night; and the older daughter went in and lay with her father. He, however, did not know when she lay down, nor when she arose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then in the morning the older daughter said to the younger, \uc1\u8220*Last night I lay with my father. Let us make him drink wine again tonight; and you go in and lie with him, so that we can preserve our family through our father.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}So they made their father drink wine that night as well. The younger arose and lay with him. He, however, did not know when she lay down nor when she arose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}In this way both the daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Then Lot went up from Zoar with his two daughters and lived in a cave on the heights, for he was afraid to stay in Zoar. His oldest daughter bore a son, and named him Moab. He is the father of the present Moabites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The younger also bore a son and named him Ben-ammi. That one is the father of the present Ammonites.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Abraham in Gerar

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}Abraham journeyed from there toward the land of the Negreb, settling between Kadesh and Shur, and staying for a while in Gerar,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}where he said that his wife Sarah was his sister. So King Abimelech of Gerar had Sarah brought to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But God came to Abimelech in a dream in the night and said to him, \uc1\u8220*You will die, because of the woman you have taken, for she is married.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But Abimelech had not come near her; so he said, Lord, will you slay an innocent people?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Did Abraham not himself say to me, \uc1\u8216*She is my sister?\uc1\u8217* And even she herself said, \uc1\u8216*He is my brother.\uc1\u8217* I acted innocently and in good faith.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then God said to him in the dream, \uc1\u8220*I know that you acted innocently and in good faith, and I also prevented you from sinning against me, since I did not allow you to touch her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now you must restore the man\uc1\u8217*s wife \uc1\u8212* for he is a prophet and he can intercede for you, and you will live. But if you do not restore her at once, you will die, together with all your people.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Abimelech rose early in the morning, and summoned all his court, and when he had told all these things in their hearing, they were greatly afraid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Abimelech called Abraham and asked him, \uc1\u8220*What have you done to us? What harm have I done to you to make you bring this great sin on me and my kingdom? You have done to me something that ought not to be done.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Abimelech said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*What was your purpose in doing this thing?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Abraham answered, \uc1\u8220*Because I thought, \uc1\u8216*Surely the fear of God is not in this place and they will slay me for my wife\uc1\u8217*s sake.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Moreover, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father, though not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So when God caused me to wander from my father\uc1\u8217*s house, I said to her, \uc1\u8216*This is how you can show your loyalty to me: at every place to which we come, say that you are my brother.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Abimelech then took sheep and oxen, and male and female slaves and gave them to Abraham, and restored Sarah his wife to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Also Abimelech said, \uc1\u8220*My land lies before you; live wherever you please.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To Sarah he said, \uc1\u8220*I have given your brother a thousand pieces of silveras compensation for all that has befallen you; and in every respect you are vindicated.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Abraham prayed to God and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his slave-girls, so that they could have children ({\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}for the {\scaps Lord} had made every woman in Abimelech\uc1\u8217*s household barren, because of Sarah, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s wife).
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Isaac

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}The {\scaps Lord} remembered what he had told Sarah, and he did as he had promised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So Sarah had Abraham\uc1\u8217*s son in his old age at the fixed time of which God had told him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Abraham named him Isaac{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Laughter }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and when he was eight days old he circumcised him as God had told him to.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Sarah said, \uc1\u8220*God has made laughter for me; everyone who hears will laugh with me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}She added, \uc1\u8220*Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet I have born him a son in his old age.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When the child grew up, Abraham made a great feast on the day that he was weaned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But Sarah saw the son whom Hagar the Egyptian had borne to Abraham, playing with her son Isaac.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}She said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*Drive out this slave-girl and her son, for the son of this slave-girl shall not be heir with my son Isaac\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This request was very displeasing to Abraham because the boy was his son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But the {\scaps Lord} said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*Do not be displeased because of the boy and because of your slave-girl. Listen to all that Sarah says to you, for only through the line of Isaac will your name be perpetuated.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I will also make of the son of the slave-girl a great nation, because he is your son.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Abraham got up early in the morning and took bread and a skin of water and gave it to Hagar, and he put the boy upon her shoulder and sent her away. So she departed and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When the water in the skin was gone, she left the child under one of the desert shrubs{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and went a short distance away and sat down and said, \uc1\u8220*Let me not see the death of the child.\uc1\u8221* So she sat there and wept.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then the {\scaps Lord} heard the cry of the boy, and the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} called to Hagar from heaven and said, \uc1\u8220*What troubles you, Hagar? Don\uc1\u8217*t be afraid, for the {\scaps Lord} has heard the boy\uc1\u8217*s cry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Rise, lift him up, and hold him fast by the hand, for I will make him a great nation.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The {\scaps Lord} opened her eyes and she saw a well of water. Then she went and filled the skin with water and gave the boy a drink.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} was with the boy, and he grew up,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and lived in the wilderness of Paran, and became a bowman. His mother secured a wife for him from Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The pact with Abimelech

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}It happened at that time that Abimelech and Phicol the captain of his army spoke to Abraham, saying, \uc1\u8220*God is with you in all you do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now therefore take an oath to me here by God that you will not be false to me, nor to my son nor to my descendants; but that you will treat me and the land you have stayed in according to the kindness which I have shown you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Abraham said, \uc1\u8220*I swear it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now as often as Abraham complained to Abimelech because of the well of water which Abimelech\uc1\u8217*s servants had seized,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Abimelech said, \uc1\u8220*I do not know who has done this thing, neither have you told me nor have I heard of it until today.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them to Abimelech, and made an agreement with each other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But when Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Abimelech said to Abraham, \uc1\u8220*What is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs which you have set by themselves?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Abraham answered, \uc1\u8220*Accept these seven ewe lambs from my hand so that you may be my witness that I dug this well.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The place was called Beer-sheba, because it was there they swore their oath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So they made a solemn agreement at Beer-sheba, and Abimelech arose with Phicol the captain of his army, and they returned to the land of the Philistines.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Abraham, however, planted a tamarisk tree in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of the {\scaps Lord}, the Everlasting God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Abraham stayed in the land of the Philistines many days.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The test of Abraham

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}Later the {\scaps Lord} tested Abraham, saying to him, \uc1\u8220*Abraham\uc1\u8221*; and he answered, \uc1\u8220*Here I am.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8220*Take your son, your only son Isaac, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah, and offer him there as a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will show you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Abraham rose early in the morning and saddled his donkey and took two of his servants with him, and his son Isaac. When he had split the wood for the burnt-offering, he set out for the place of which God had told him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On the third day, when Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}he said to his servants, \uc1\u8220*Stay here with the donkey, while I and the boy go over there. When we have worshipped, we will come back to you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then Abraham took the wood for the burnt-offering and laid it on Isaac, his son. He took the fire and the knife, and they both went on together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Isaac spoke to Abraham his father and said, \uc1\u8220*My father!\uc1\u8221* and Abraham answered, \uc1\u8220*Yes, my son.\uc1\u8221* Isaac said, \uc1\u8220*Here is the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt-offering?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Abraham answered, \uc1\u8220*My son, God will himself provide a lamb for a burnt-offering.\uc1\u8221* So the two went on together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When they came to the place of which God had told him, Abraham built the altar there and laid the wood on it and bound Isaac his son and laid him on the altar upon the wood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Abraham reached out his hand, and took the knife to kill his son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} called to him from heaven, saying, \uc1\u8220*Abraham, Abraham!\uc1\u8221* and he answered, \uc1\u8220*Here am I.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He said, \uc1\u8220*Do not put your hand upon the boy, nor do anything to him, for now I know that you love God, for you have not refused to give your son, your only son, to me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then Abraham looked up, and he saw a ram caught in the thicket by his horns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So Abraham took the ram and offered him up as a burnt-offering instead of his son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He named the place \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} will provide\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8212* and even today people say, \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} will provide on his mountain.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The messenger of the {\scaps Lord} again called to Abraham and said, \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} declares, \uc1\u8216*Because you have done this thing and have not kept back your son, your only son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will surely bless you. I will make your children as many as the stars of the heavens and as the sand which is on the seashore, so that they will conquer their enemies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}All the nations of the earth will ask for themselves a blessing like theirs, because you have obeyed my command.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Abraham returned to his servants, and they arose and went together to Beer-sheba.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
Abraham was living in Beer-sheba.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}After these things, Abraham was told, \uc1\u8220*Milcah has also borne children to your brother Nahor,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Uz his first born, Buz his brother, Kemuel the father of Aram,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Chesed, Hazo and Pildash, Jidlaph and Bethuel.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}(And Bethuel fathered Rebekah). These eight Mileah bore to Nahor, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And his concubine whose name was Reumah, also bore Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maaeah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Sarah\uc1\u8217*s death and the cave of Machpelah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Sarah lived to be a hundred and twenty-seven years old.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When she died in Kiriath-arba (that is Hebron), in the land of Canaan, Abraham went to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When Abraham rose up from the presence of his dead, he said to the Hittites,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*I am a stranger and a foreigner living among you; give me possession of a burying-place with you, so that I may bury my dead out of my sight.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The Hittites answered Abraham,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*Hear us, my lord; you are a mighty prince among us; bury your dead in the best of our burial places. None of us will withhold from you his burial place, so that you may bury your dead.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Abraham rose up and bowed before the people of the land, the Hittites,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and said to them, \uc1\u8220*If it is your intention that I should bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and speak for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}to give me the cave of Machpelah, which he has, which is at the end of his field. Let him give to me for the full price in your presence, so that I can own it as a burying-place.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now Ephron was sitting with the other Hittites, and, in the presence of all the Hittites, all who went in and out at the gate of his city he answered Abraham,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*No, my lord, hear me. I give the field to you and the cave that is in it I give to you; in the presence of the children of my people I give it to you; bury your dead.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Abraham bowed before the people of the land,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and spoke to Ephron in the hearing of the people of the land, saying, \uc1\u8220*Please, hear me \uc1\u8212* I will give the price of the field; accept it from me so that I may bury my dead there.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Ephron answered Abraham by saying to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*My lord, listen to me; a piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver, what is that between me and you? Bury your dead.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then Abraham accepted Ephron\uc1\u8217*s terms and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the hearing of the Hittites, four hundred shekels of silver, on the standard weights used by merchants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah which was to the east of Mamre, the field, and the cave which was in it, with all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the border of it round about,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}were transferred to Abraham\uc1\u8217*s possession in the presence of the Hittites, before all that went in at the gate of his city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah to the east of Mamre (that is Hebron), in the land of Canaan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In this way the field and the cave that is in it were transferred by the Hittites to Abraham that he might possess a burying-place.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Rebekah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}When Abraham was very old and the {\scaps Lord} had blessed him in every way,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Abraham said to the eldest of his household servants, who had charge of all his affairs, \uc1\u8220*Put your hand under my thigh,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}while I make you promise by the {\scaps Lord}, the God of heaven and earth, that you will not let my son marry one of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I live,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}but that you will go to my own country and to my relatives and there get a wife for my son Isaac.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The servant said to him, \uc1\u8220*Perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me to this land. Must I then take your son back to the land from which you came?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Abraham said to him, \uc1\u8220*See to it that you do not take my son back there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord}, the God of heaven, who took me from my father\uc1\u8217*s house and from my native land and who solemnly promised me, \uc1\u8216*To your children I will give this land,\uc1\u8217* will send his messenger before you and there you will get a wife for my son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But if the woman is not willing to come with you, then you will be free from this promise to me; only never take my son back there.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So the servant put his hand under Abraham\uc1\u8217*s thigh and made the promise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the servant took ten of his master\uc1\u8217*s camels and set out with precious gifts from his master. So he went to the town of Aram-naharaim, where Nahor lived.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He made the camels kneel down outside the town by the well in the evening, at the time when women go out to draw water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then he said, \uc1\u8220*{\scaps Lord}, God of my master Abraham, give me, I pray, success today, and show kindness to my master Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Here I am standing by the spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the town are coming out to draw water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May that young woman to whom I shall say, \uc1\u8216*Please let down your water-jar that I may drink\uc1\u8217*; and who answers, \uc1\u8216*Drink and I will also water your camels,\uc1\u8217* may she be the one you have chosen for thy servant Isaac. By this I shall know that you have shown kindness to my master.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then even before he was through speaking, Rebekah, who was the daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s brother, came out with her water-jar upon her shoulder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}She was very beautiful and unmarried, a virgin. She went down to the spring, filled her jar, and came up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then the servant ran to meet her and said, \uc1\u8220*Please let me drink a little water from your jar.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}She answered, \uc1\u8220*Drink, sir,\uc1\u8221* and quickly let down her water-jar from her shoulder upon her hand and gave him a drink.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When she had finished giving him a drink she said, \uc1\u8220*I will draw water for your camels also, until they have finished drinking.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So she quickly emptied her jar into the trough and ran again to the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Meanwhile the man was silently gazing at her in order to find out whether the {\scaps Lord} had made his journey successful or not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As soon as the camels had finished drinking, the man took a gold ring, half a shekel in weight, and put it in her nose, and put on her arms two golden bracelets weighing ten shekels,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and said, \uc1\u8220*Whose daughter are you? Tell me, I beg of you. Is there room in your father\uc1\u8217*s house for us to spend the night?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}She answered, \uc1\u8220*I am the daughter of Bethuel son of of Milcah and Nahor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}We have plenty of straw and feed, and there is a place for you to spend the night.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then the man bowed his head and worshipped the {\scaps Lord},{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}saying, \uc1\u8220*Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, the God of my master Abraham, who has continued to show his mercy and his faithfulness toward my master. As for me, the {\scaps Lord} has led me on the way to the house of my master\uc1\u8217*s relatives.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then the young woman ran and told these things to her mother\uc1\u8217*s family.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban; and Laban ran out to the man at the spring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}When he saw the bracelets on his sister\uc1\u8217*s hands and the ring, and when he heard Rebekah say, \uc1\u8220*This is what the man said to me,\uc1\u8221* he went to the man, who was still standing by the camels at the spring,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and said, \uc1\u8220*Come in, you who are blessed by the {\scaps Lord}! Why do you stand outside? For I have cleared the house and have room for the camels.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So he brought the man into the house and took the packs off the camels and furnished straw and feed for them, and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But when food was set before him to eat, he said, \uc1\u8220*I will not eat until I have made known my errand.\uc1\u8221* They answered, \uc1\u8220*Speak.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}He said, \uc1\u8220*I am Abraham\uc1\u8217*s servant;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and the {\scaps Lord} has blessed my master greatly, so that he has become very rich. He has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold, servants, and camels and donkeys.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Now Sarah, my master\uc1\u8217*s wife, had a son when she was old, and my master has given him all that he has.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}My master also made me promise, saying, \uc1\u8216*Do not let my son marry one of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I live,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}but go to my father\uc1\u8217*s home and to my relatives and there find a wife for my son.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8220*When I said to my master, \uc1\u8216*What if the woman will not follow me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}he said to me, \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord}, whom I love and serve, will send his messenger with you and make you successful, and you will find for my son a wife from among my relatives and my father\uc1\u8217*s family.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Then you will be free from your promise to me. But if you go to my family and they do not give her to you, you shall also be free from your promise to me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42-43}So I came today to the spring and said, \uc1\u8216*{\scaps Lord}, God of my master Abraham, see, I am standing by the spring of water. If you will make the errand on which I am going successful, then let the young woman who comes to draw, to whom I say, \uc1\u8216*Please give me a little water from your jar to drink\uc1\u8217*,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and who shall say to me, \uc1\u8216*Drink, and I will also draw for your camels\uc1\u8217*, let that one be the woman whom the {\scaps Lord} has chosen for my master\uc1\u8217*s son.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}\uc1\u8220*Even before I was through speaking, Rebekah came out with her water-jar on her shoulder and went down to the spring and drew water. When I said to her, \uc1\u8216*Please let me drink,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}she quickly let down her water-jar from her shoulder and answered, \uc1\u8216*Drink, and I will also water your camels.\uc1\u8217* So I drank, and she also watered the camels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Then I asked her, \uc1\u8216*Whose daughter are you?\uc1\u8217* She said, \uc1\u8216*The daughter of Bethuel son of Nahor and Milcah.\uc1\u8217* So I put the ring in her nose and the bracelets on her arms.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}I bowed my head and worshipped and blessed the {\scaps Lord} God of my master Abraham who had led me on the right way to find the daughter of my master\uc1\u8217*s brother for his son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Tell me whether or not you will deal kindly and truly with my master, so that I shall know what to do!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Then Laban and his family answered, \uc1\u8220*The matter is in the hands of the {\scaps Lord}. We cannot say either \uc1\u8216*yes\uc1\u8217* or \uc1\u8216*no.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}See, Rebekah is before you; take her and go and let her be the wife of your master\uc1\u8217*s son, as the {\scaps Lord} has said.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}When Abraham\uc1\u8217*s servant heard their words, he bowed to the ground before the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Then he brought out gold and silver ornaments and clothing and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave costly gifts to her brother and to her mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}He and the men who were with him ate and drank and spent the night there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
When they rose in the morning, the servant said, \uc1\u8220*Send me away to my master.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}But Rebekah\uc1\u8217*s brother and mother answered, \uc1\u8220*Let the young woman stay with us a month or at least ten days; after that she may go.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}But he said to them, \uc1\u8220*Do not delay me, for the {\scaps Lord} has given me success. Send me away that I may go to my master.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}Then they said, \uc1\u8220*We will call the young woman and ask her.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}So they called Rebekah and said to her, \uc1\u8220*Will you go with this man?\uc1\u8221* She answered, \uc1\u8220*I will go.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}So they sent away their sister Rebekah and her nurse with Abraham\uc1\u8217*s servant and his men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}They also blessed Rebekah, saying to her, \uc1\u8220*Our sister! May your children and their children become thousands and thousands, may your sons conquer the cities of their enemies!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}Then Rebekah set out with her maids and, riding upon the camels, they followed the man. So the servant took Rebekah and went away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}Now Isaac had come from Beer-lahai-roi, and was settled in the Negeb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}In the evening, when Isaac had gone out for a walk in the field, he looked up and saw camels coming.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}Rebekah too looked up, and when she saw Isaac, she quickly alighted from the camel{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}and said to the servant, \uc1\u8220*Who is this man walking in the field to meet us?\uc1\u8221* When the servant said, \uc1\u8220*It is my master,\uc1\u8221* she took her veil and covered her face.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}Then the servant told Isaac all that he had done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}Isaac brought Rebekah to the tent of Sarah his mother, and she became his wife; and he loved her. So Isaac was comforted after his mother\uc1\u8217*s death.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Geneaology, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s death

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}Abraham had taken another wife, whose name was Keturah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}She gave him sons: Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Jokshan fathered Sheba, and Dedan. The sons of Dedan were Asshurim, Letushim, and Leummim;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and the sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were descendants of Keturah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Abraham had left all that he had to Isaac.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But to the sons of his concubines, Abraham had given gifts while he was still alive, and had sent them away from Isaac his son, eastward, to the east country.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Abraham had lived for one hundred and seventy-five years,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}when he breathed his last, dying in a good old age, old and satisfied with living, and was gathered to his forefathers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is east of Mamre,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}the field which Abraham purchased from the Hittites. There Abraham was buried with Sarah his wife.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}After the death of Abraham, God blessed Isaac his son, who settled at Beer-lahai-roi.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This is a list of descedents of Ishmael, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s son whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah\uc1\u8217*s maid-servant gave to Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}These then are the names of the sons of Ishmael, named according to their order of birth: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Mishma, Dumah, Massa,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their villages, and by their encampments, twelve princes according to their peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Ishmael lived for one hundred and thirty-seven years; and he breathed his last, and was gathered to his people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They settled from Havilah to Shur that iseast of Egypt, as far as Assyria; he settled down alongside all his people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}These are the descendants of Isaac, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s son. Abraham fathered Isaac.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Isaac was forty years old, when he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean of Paddan-aram, the sister of Laban the Aramean.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Esau and Jacob

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Isaac prayed to the {\scaps Lord} for his wife, because she had no children; and the {\scaps Lord} heard his prayer, and Rebekah became pregnant with twins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The children struggled against each other in her womb, and she said, \uc1\u8220*Why is this happening to me? What does it mean?\uc1\u8221* She went to ask the {\scaps Lord},{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}who said to her,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Two nations are in your womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
two peoples divided from birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
One will be stronger than the other,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the elder will serve the younger.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When the time came for her to give birth, she became the mother of twin boys.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}The first was from birth red, all over like a hairy mantle; so they named him Esau{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Hairy }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Afterwards his brother came holding Esau\uc1\u8217*s heel with his hand; so he was named Jacob{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Supplanter }. Isaac was sixty years old when they were born.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}As they grew up, Esau became a skilful hunter, a man who lived out in the fields; but Jacob was a quiet man who stayed about the tents.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Isaac loved Esau, for he had a taste for venison; but Rebekah loved Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Once when Jacob was preparing a stew, Esau came in from the fields, and he was very hungry;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}so he said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*Let me swallow some of that red stew, for I am very hungry.\uc1\u8221* (This is why he was called Edom.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*Sell me first of all your right as the eldest.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Esau replied, \uc1\u8220*See, I am nearly dead now! So of what use is this birthright to me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*First solemnly promise to give it to me.\uc1\u8221* So Esau solemnly promised and sold his birthright to Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then Jacob gave Esau bread and stewed lentils, and when he had finished eating and drinking, he got up and went away. In this way Esau gave away his birthright.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Famine again

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}Now when a famine came in the land, (not the first famine that was in the days of Abraham), Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines at Gerar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} appeared to him and said, \uc1\u8220*Go not down into Egypt; settle in the land of which I will tell you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}stay in this land, and I will be with you and will bless you; for to you, and to your descendants, I will give all these lands, and will establish the oath which I swore to Abraham your father:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I will make your descendants as many as the stars of heaven, and give to your descendants all these lands; and all the nations of the earth will invoke for themselves a blessing like that of your descendants,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}because Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Isaac settled in Gerar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The men of the place asked him about his wife; and he said, \uc1\u8220*She is my sister\uc1\u8221*; for he was afraid to say \uc1\u8220*my wife\uc1\u8221*; lest the men of the place kill him for Rebekah; because she was beautiful to look at.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But after he had been there a long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out of the window, and saw Isaac just as he was caressing Rebekah his wife.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Abimelech called to Isaac, and said, \uc1\u8220*Surely she is your wife; why did you say \uc1\u8216*She is my sister?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* Isaac answered him, \uc1\u8220*I said it, so that I might not die because of her.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Abimelech said, \uc1\u8220*What is this you have done to us? One of the people might have lain with your wife and so you would have brought guilt upon us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Abimelech warned all the people, saying, \uc1\u8220*The person who touches this man or his wife will be put to death.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Isaac sowed in that land, and reaped in the same year an increase of a hundredfold, for the {\scaps Lord} blessed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The man became rich, and grew richer and richer until he became very wealthy; for he had many flocks, and many herds, and a great household; so that the Philistines envied him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now all the wells which Isaac\uc1\u8217*s father\uc1\u8217*s servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped, and filled with earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But Isaac dug again the wells of water, which they had dug in the days of Abraham his father \uc1\u8212* for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham and he gave them the same names as his father had given them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Abimelech said to Isaac, \uc1\u8220*Go from us; for you are much mightier than we are.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So Isaac departed, and encamped in the valley of Gerar, and settled there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Isaac reopened the wells which had been dug in the days of his father Abraham and stopped by the Philistines after his death. He called them by the names his father had given them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When Isaac\uc1\u8217*s slaves dug in the valley, they found there a well of spring water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac\uc1\u8217*s herdsmen, saying, \uc1\u8220*The water is ours.\uc1\u8221* So he called the name of the well Esek{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Contention }, because they contended with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And when they dug another well, they quarreled over that also. So he called the name of it Sitnah{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Enmity }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He moved on from these and dug another well; and over that one there was no dispute. So he called it Rehoboth{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Room }, and said, \uc1\u8220*For now the {\scaps Lord} has made room for us and we shall be fruitful in the land.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Isaac went up from there to Beer-sheba.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The {\scaps Lord} appeared to him the same night and said, \uc1\u8220*I am the God of Abraham your father, do not be afraid, because I am with you, and will bless you and make your descendants numerous for the sake of my servant Abraham.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Isaac built an altar there, and called upon the name of the {\scaps Lord}, and pitched his tent there. There also Isaac\uc1\u8217*s slaves dug a well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then Abimelech came to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath his friend, and Phicol the captain of his army.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Isaac said to them, \uc1\u8220*Why have you come to me, since you hated me and have driven me away from you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They said, \uc1\u8220*We saw plainly that the {\scaps Lord} was with you, so we said, \uc1\u8216*Let there now be a sworn treaty between us \uc1\u8212* let us make a solemn agreement with you \uc1\u8212*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}so that you will do us no harm, as we have not touched you, and as we have done to you nothing but good, and have sent you away in peace.\uc1\u8217* You are now blessed of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And he made them a feast and they ate and drank.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then in the morning they arose early and took oaths with each other; and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}That same day, Isaac\uc1\u8217*s slaves came and told him about a well which they had dug, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*We have found water.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He called it Shebna{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Oath }, therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba to this day.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Esau and Jacob

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When Esau was forty years old he married Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and they were a source of grief to Isaac and to Rebekah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 27}When Isaac was so old and so nearly blind that he could not see, he called Esau his oldest son and said to him, \uc1\u8220*My son.\uc1\u8221* Esau answered, \uc1\u8220*Here I am.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Isaac said, \uc1\u8220*See, I am old and do not know how soon I may die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Take your quiver and your bow and go out into the fields and hunt venison for me{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and prepare for me savory food, such as I love, and bring it to me that I may eat and that I may bless you before I die.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Rebekah was listening when Isaac spoke to his son Esau. So when Esau went into the fields to hunt venison,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Rebekah said to her son Jacob, \uc1\u8220*I just now heard your father say to your brother Esau,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Bring me venison and prepare for me savory food that I may eat it and bless you before I die.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now, my son, do as I tell you:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Go to the flock and bring me from there two good young goats, and I will make of them savory food for your father, such as he loves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then take it to him, so that he may eat, so that he may bless you before he dies.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, \uc1\u8220*You know that my brother Esau is a hairy man, while I am smooth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Perhaps my father will touch me; then I will appear to him to be a deceiver, and I will bring blame upon me and not a blessing.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But his mother said to him, \uc1\u8220*Let the curse be on me, my son; only obey me and go, bring the goats to me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So he went and brought them to his mother, and his mother made savory food such as his father loved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Rebekah also took the fine clothes of her older son Esau, which she had with her in the tent, and put them on her younger son Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then she put the skins of the goats upon his hands and upon the smooth part of his neck,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and she placed the savory food and the bread which she had prepared in his hand,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and he went to his father and said, \uc1\u8220*My father.\uc1\u8221* Isaac answered, \uc1\u8220*Here I am; who are you, my son?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*I am Esau your oldest son. I have done as you commanded me. Sit up and eat some of my venison, so that you may bless me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Isaac said to his son, \uc1\u8220*How very quickly you have found it, my son.\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*Yes, because the {\scaps Lord} your God gave me success.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then Isaac said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*Come here, my son, that I may touch you to find out whether you are really my son Esau or not.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Jacob went near to Isaac his father, and he felt him and said, \uc1\u8220*The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23-24}Are you really my son Esau?\uc1\u8221* Jacob answered, \uc1\u8220*I am.\uc1\u8221* Isaac did not recognize him, for his hands were hairy like his brother Esau\uc1\u8217*s. So he blessed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Isaac said, \uc1\u8220*Bring the food to me, that I may eat some of my son\uc1\u8217*s venison and bless you.\uc1\u8221* So he brought it to him, and he ate. Jacob also brought him wine, and he drank.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then his father Isaac said to him, \uc1\u8220*Come near now and kiss me, my son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}As he came near and kissed him, he smelled the smell of his garment, and blessed him:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
See, the smell of my son
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
is as that of fields blessed by the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}May God give you dew from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
a share in the earth\uc1\u8217*s fertile places,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and plenty of corn and wine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}May peoples be subject to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and nations bow down to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Be master over your brothers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Let your mother\uc1\u8217*s sons bow down before you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Cursed be all who curse you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and blessed be all who bless you.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}As soon as Isaac had given Jacob his blessing, and Jacob was about to leave his father, Esau his brother came in from his hunting.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}He also had made savory food and was bringing it to his father. So he said to him, \uc1\u8220*Father, rise and eat of your son\uc1\u8217*s venison, that you may bless me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But Isaac his father said to him, \uc1\u8220*Who are you?\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*I am your son, your oldest, Esau.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then Isaac trembled and said, \uc1\u8220*Who then is he that has hunted venison and brought it to me, so that I ate plentifully before you came, and blessed him? His blessing cannot be undone!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When Esau heard the words of his father, he uttered a loud and bitter cry and said to his father, \uc1\u8220*Father, bless me also!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But Isaac said, \uc1\u8220*Your brother came with deceit and has taken away your blessing.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Esau said, \uc1\u8220*He was correctly named Jacob{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  means Supplanter }. He has supplanted me these two times: he took my birthright, and now he has taken my blessing!\uc1\u8221* Then he said, \uc1\u8220*Have you kept a blessing for me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Isaac answered Esau, \uc1\u8220*I have made him your master and I have given to him all his relatives as slaves and grain and wine as his food. What then can I do for you, my son?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Esau said to his father, \uc1\u8220*Is that the only blessing you have, my father? Father, bless me too!\uc1\u8221* and Esau began to weep aloud.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Then Isaac his father answered him:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*You shall live far from earth\uc1\u8217*s fertile places,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and away from the dew of heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}By your sword you will live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and your brother you will serve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But whenever you will break loose,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
you will break off his yoke from your neck.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing that his father had given him. Esau said to himself, \uc1\u8220*My father will soon die; then I will kill Jacob, my brother.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}When the words of her older son Esau were told to Rebekah, she sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Your brother, Esau, is going to kill you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Now, my son, listen to me: run away to my brother Laban at Haran{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and stay with him for a time until your brother is no longer angry{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}\uc1\u8212* until he is no longer angry and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send and bring you back. Why should I lose both of you in one day?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Wives for Jacob and Esau

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Rebekah said to Isaac, \uc1\u8220*I am disgusted with life because of the Hittite women; if Jacob marries a Hittite woman, such as these, the women of the land, I might as well die.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 28}Then Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and instructed him, \uc1\u8220*You must not marry any of the daughters of Canaan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of Bethuel your mother\uc1\u8217*s father; and marry one of the daughters of Laban, your mother\uc1\u8217*s brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}May God Almighty bless you, and make you fruitful and numerous, so that you may become a great people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and may he give the blessing of Abraham to you and to your descendants with you so that you may inherit the land you have settled in, which God gave to Abraham.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So Isaac sent away Jacob, and he went to Paddan-aram to Laban, the son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob and Esau\uc1\u8217*s mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now when Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and send him away to Paddan-aram, to find a wife there, and that, as he blessed him, he instructed him: \uc1\u8220*You must not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan\uc1\u8221*,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and that Jacob had obeyed his father and mother, and had gone to Paddan-aram,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and when Esau also saw that the daughters of Canaan did not please Isaac his father,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}then Esau went to Ishmael, and in addition to the wives that he had, married Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham\uc1\u8217*s son, the sister of Nebaioth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jacob and the ladder

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Jacob set out from Beersheba and went toward Haran.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When he arrived at a certain holy place, he passed the night there, because the sun had set. He took one of the stones from its place and put it under his head and lay down to sleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then he dreamed and saw a ladder set up on the earth, and its top reached to heaven; and the messengers of God were going up and down on it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} also stood beside him and said, \uc1\u8220*I am the {\scaps Lord}, God of Abraham and God of Isaac. The land on which you lie I will give to you and to your children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Your descendants will be as countless as the dust of the earth and you will spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south, and all the families of the earth will wish for a blessing like yours and that of your descendants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}See, I am with you, and will keep you wherever you go and will bring you again to this land; for I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When Jacob awoke from his sleep, he said, \uc1\u8220*Surely the {\scaps Lord} is in this place, and I did not know it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And he was filled with awe and said, \uc1\u8220*This place is the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So Jacob rose early in the morning and took the stone that he had put under his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil upon the top of it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He named that place Bethel{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  which means House of God }. (The earlier name of the town was Luz.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Jacob also made this promise, \uc1\u8220*If God will be with me and protect me on this journey which I am making and give me bread to eat and clothing to put on,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and if I return safe and sound to my father\uc1\u8217*s house, then the {\scaps Lord} shall be my God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and this stone which I have set up as a pillar will be a house of God. And of all that you give me I will surely give a tenth to you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Leah and Rachel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 29}Jacob continued on his journey and arrived at the land of the people of the East.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He looked and saw a well in the field, and there were three flocks of sheep lying down by it; for from that well they watered the flocks; but there was a large stone over the well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When all the flocks were gathered there, the shepherds used to roll away the stone and water the sheep and then put the stone back in its place over the well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Jacob said to the men, \uc1\u8220*My friends, from where do you come?\uc1\u8221* They said, \uc1\u8220*We are from Haran.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then he said to them, \uc1\u8220*Do you know Laban the son of Nahor?\uc1\u8221* They said, \uc1\u8220*We know him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said to them, \uc1\u8220*Is all well with him?\uc1\u8221* They said, \uc1\u8220*All is well; indeed, this is Rachel his daughter coming with the sheep.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He said, \uc1\u8220*See, the sun is still high! It is not time for the cattle to be gathered together. Water the sheep and feed them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But they said, \uc1\u8220*We cannot until all the flocks are gathered together, and they roll away the stone from the well; then we will water the sheep.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}While he was still speaking with them, Rachel came with her father\uc1\u8217*s sheep; for she was a shepherdess.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban, his mother\uc1\u8217*s brother, and Laban\uc1\u8217*s sheep, he went up and rolled the stone from the well and watered the flock of Laban his mother\uc1\u8217*s brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then Jacob kissed Rachel and wept aloud.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When Jacob told Rachel that he was a relative of her father and that he was Rebekah\uc1\u8217*s son, she ran and told her father.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}As soon as Laban heard about Jacob, his sister\uc1\u8217*s son, he ran to meet him, put his arms around him, kissed him many times, and brought him to his home. When Jacob told Laban all that had happened,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Laban said to him, \uc1\u8220*Surely you are my bone and my flesh.\uc1\u8221* So he remained with him a whole month.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Laban said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*Should you serve me for nothing simply because you are related to me? Tell me what shall be your wages?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now Laban had two daughters: the name of the older was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Leah\uc1\u8217*s eyes were dull, but Rachel was beautiful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Jacob loved Rachel, and so he said, \uc1\u8220*I will serve you seven years for Rachel your younger daughter.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Laban said, \uc1\u8220*It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to any other man. Stay with me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few days, because he loved her so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then Jacob said to Laban, \uc1\u8220*Give me my wife, for my time is up, and let me marry her.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Laban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}In the evening he took Leah his daughter and brought her to Jacob, and Jacob received her as his wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}At the same time Laban gave his slave-girl Zilpah to his daughter Leah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When in the morning Jacob found it was Leah, he said to Laban, \uc1\u8220*What is this you have done to me? Did I not serve you for Rachel? Why then have you deceived me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Laban said, \uc1\u8220*It is not the custom among us to give the younger in marriage before the older.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Remain with this one during the marriage week, then we will give you the other also for the service which you will give me during seven more years.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Jacob did so: he remained with Leah during the marriage week. Then Laban gave him Rachel his daughter to be his wife,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and his slave-girl Bilhah to serve Rachel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jacob slept with Rachel as well, and loved Rachel more than Leah. So he had to serve Laban seven years more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When the {\scaps Lord} saw that Leah was spurned, he gave her the gift of motherhood; Rachel, however, was barren.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So Leah gave birth to a son whom she named Reuben{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Behold a son }; for she said, \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} has seen my affliction; now my husband will love me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}She gave birth to another son; and said, \uc1\u8220*Because the {\scaps Lord} has heard that I am spurned, he has given me this one also\uc1\u8221*; and she called his name Simeon{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Hearing }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}She gave birth to another son and said, \uc1\u8220*Now this time my husband will become attached to me because I have borne him three sons\uc1\u8221*; therefore his name was called Levi{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Attached }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}She gave birth to another son and said, \uc1\u8220*This time I will praise the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8221*; therefore she called his name Judah{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Praise } then she stopped having children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 30}When Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children, she was jealous of her sister and said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*Give me children or else I will die.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But Jacob\uc1\u8217*s anger was aroused against Rachel, and he said, \uc1\u8220*Am I in God\uc1\u8217*s place? Who has withheld offspring from you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}She said, \uc1\u8220*Here is my slave-girl Bilhah, go to her, so that she may bear sons who can be laid on my knees and I also may obtain children though her.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So she gave him Bilhah her slave-girl for a wife, and Jacob slept with her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Bilhah conceived and bore Jacob a son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Rachel said, \uc1\u8220*God has judged me and has also heard my voice and has given me a son.\uc1\u8221* So she called his name Dan{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  He judged }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Bilhah, Rachel\uc1\u8217*s slave-girl conceived again, and bore Jacob a second son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Rachel said, \uc1\u8220*With superhuman wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and have prevailed\uc1\u8221*; so she called his name Naphtali{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Obtained by wrestling }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When Leah saw that she had stopped having children, she took Zilpah her slave-girl, and gave her to Jacob as a wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Zilpah, Leah\uc1\u8217*s slave-girl bore Jacob a son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Leah said, \uc1\u8220*Fortunate!\uc1\u8221* and she called his name Gad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Zilpah bore Jacob a second son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and Leah said, \uc1\u8220*Happy am I! Now women will call me happy\uc1\u8221*, and she called his name Asher.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}One time, during the wheat harvest, Reuben went and found mandrakes in the field and brought them to his mother Leah. Rachel asked Leah, \uc1\u8220*Please give me some of your son\uc1\u8217*s mandrakes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But Leah said to her, \uc1\u8220*Is it a small matter that you have taken away my husband, that you would also take away my son\uc1\u8217*s mandrakes?\uc1\u8221* Rachel said, \uc1\u8220*In exchange for your son\uc1\u8217*s mandrakes, Jacob can sleep with you tonight.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So when Jacob came from the field in the evening, Leah went out to meet him, and said, \uc1\u8220*You sleep with me tonight, for I have hired you with my son\uc1\u8217*s mandrakes.\uc1\u8221* So he slept with her that night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}God heard Leah\uc1\u8217*s prayer, and she conceived and bore Jacob a fifth son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Leah said, \uc1\u8220*God has given me my reward, because I gave my slave-girl to my husband\uc1\u8221*; so she called his name Issachar{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  There is a hire }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Leah conceived again, and bore a sixth son to Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}She said, \uc1\u8220*God has endowed me with a good dowry; now my husband will honor me, because I have borne him six sons\uc1\u8221*; and she called him Zebulun{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Dwelling }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And afterwards she had a daughter and named her Dinah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then God remembered Rachel and heard her prayer and gave her a child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}She conceived and gave birth to a son and said, \uc1\u8220*God has taken away my disgrace.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}She called his name Joseph{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  He will add }, saying, \uc1\u8220*the {\scaps Lord} will add to me another son.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, \uc1\u8220*Send me away, so that I may go to my own place, and to my country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served you, so that I may go; for you know the service which I have rendered you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But Laban said to him, \uc1\u8220*If now I have found favor in your eyes \uc1\u8212* I have divined that the {\scaps Lord} has blessed me for your sake.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}State exactly to me your wages and I will pay them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Jacob answered him, \uc1\u8220*You know how I have served you and what your cattle have become under my care;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}for it was little which you had before I came, but now it has greatly increased, since the {\scaps Lord} has blessed you wherever I went. But now, when am I to provide for my own house as well?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Laban said, \uc1\u8220*What should I give you?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*You do not need to give me anything. If you will do this thing for me, I will again feed your flock; I will again keep it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}If I can go through all your flock today, and remove from it every black one among the lambs and the spotted and speckled among the goats; these will be my wages.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}So my honesty will testify for me later, when you come to inspect my wages: every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats and black among the lambs has been stolen by me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Laban said, \uc1\u8220*Good, let it be as you say.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But he removed that day the male goats that were striped and spotted, and all the female goats that were striped and spotted, every one that had white on it, and all the black ones among the lambs, and gave them into the hands of his sons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then he put the distance of a three days\uc1\u8217* journey between himself and Jacob; and Jacob fed the rest of Laban\uc1\u8217*s flocks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Jacob, however, took fresh rods of white poplar, and of the almond and of the plane tree, and peeled white streaks in them, exposing the white which was in the rods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}He set the rods which he had peeled before the flocks in the watering-troughs where the flocks came to drink (and they conceived when they came to drink){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}so that the flocks conceived before the rods. Therefore the flocks brought forth striped, speckled and spotted offspring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Jacob separated the lambs, and he set the faces of the flocks toward the striped and the black animals in the flock of Laban and he put his own droves apart and did not put them near Laban\uc1\u8217*s flock.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Whenever the stronger animals of the flock conceived, Jacob laid the rods in the troughs before the eyes of the flock, so that they might conceive among the rods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}But when the animals were weak, he did not put them in.In this way the weaker became Laban\uc1\u8217*s, and the stronger Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}So the man increased in wealth exceedingly, and had large flocks, and male and female slaves, and camels and donkeys.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 31}Now Jacob heard Laban\uc1\u8217*s sons say, \uc1\u8220*Jacob has taken all that was our father\uc1\u8217*s, and from that which was our father\uc1\u8217*s he has acquired all these riches.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now Jacob observed that Laban was not so favorably inclined to him as formerly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*Return to the land of your ancestors, and to your relatives, and I will be with you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then Jacob sent for Rachel and Leah to come to the field where his flocks were,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and said to them, \uc1\u8220*I see that your father is not so favorably inclined toward me as formerly; but the God of my father has been with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You know that I have served your father with all my strength.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Your father, however, has deceived me and changed my wages ten times; but God has not allowed him to do me harm.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}If your father said, \uc1\u8216*The speckled will be your wages,\uc1\u8217* then all the flock bore speckled offspring, but if he said: \uc1\u8216*The striped will be your wages,\uc1\u8217* then all the flock have striped offspring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God has taken away the possessions of your father and given them to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At the time when the flock breed, I looked up, and saw in a dream, that the male goats which were mating were striped, speckled, and piebald.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The messenger of God said to me in a dream, \uc1\u8216*Jacob!\uc1\u8217* and I said, \uc1\u8216*Here I am.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And he said, \uc1\u8216*Look! All the male goats which are mating are striped, speckled, and piebald: for I have seen all that Laban has been doing to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed a pillar of stone, where you made a vow to me. Now arise, leave this land, and return to the land where you were born.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Rachel and Leah answered him, \uc1\u8220*There is no longer any inheritance for us in our father\uc1\u8217*s house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Are we not considered as foreigners by him? For he has sold us and goes on to consume the money paid for us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Since all the riches which God has taken away from our father is ours and our children\uc1\u8217*s, do whatever God has told you to do.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Jacob rose up and put his sons and his wives on camels,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and drove away all his cattle and all the cattle which he had acquired in Paddan-aram, in order to go to Isaac his father, to the land of Canaan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And while Laban was gone to shear his sheep, Rachel stole the household gods that were her father\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So Jacob deceived Laban the Aramean \uc1\u8212* he did not tell him that he was going to flee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}So he fled with all he had; crossing the river Euphrates heading towards the hill-country of Gilead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When it was reported to Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}he took his tribesmen with him, and pursued him for seven days, and overtook him in the hill country of Gilead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream at night, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Take care that you do not speak to Jacob either good or bad.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When Laban caught up with Jacob, Jacob had pitched his tent in the hill country; and Laban with his relatives encamped in same hill country of Gilead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Laban said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*What have you done? You have deceived me and carried away my daughters like captives of war!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Why did you flee secretly, stealing away from me without telling me? I would have sent you away with mirth and with songs, with tambourine and with harp \uc1\u8212*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}but you did not allow me to kiss my sons and daughters. You have acted foolishly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It was in my power to do you harm, but the God of your father spoke to me last night saying, \uc1\u8216*Take care that you do not speak to Jacob, neither good nor bad.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But now, since you are surely going because you long so earnestly for your father\uc1\u8217*s house, why have you stolen my gods?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Jacob answered Laban, \uc1\u8220*I was afraid, because I thought you would take your daughters from me by force.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The one with whom you find your gods will be put to death; in the presence of our kinsmen investigate for yourself what is with me and take it.\uc1\u8221* Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen Laban\uc1\u8217*s gods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}So Laban went into Jacob\uc1\u8217*s tent and into Leah\uc1\u8217*s, and into the tent of the two slave-girls, but he did not find his gods. Then he went out of Leah\uc1\u8217*s tent, and entered Rachel\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Now Rachel had taken the household gods and put them in the camel\uc1\u8217*s saddle and was sitting on them, so that when Laban had searched all about the tent, he did not find them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}She said to her father, \uc1\u8220*Do not be angry that I cannot rise before you, my lord, for it is that time of the month that women have.\uc1\u8221* And though he searched thoroughly, he did not find the household gods.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then Jacob became angry and challenged Laban. \uc1\u8220*What is my crime?\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*What is my offense, that you have pursued hotly after me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Alhough you have gone through all through my things, what have you found of all your household possessions? Declare it here before my kinsmen and yours, so that they may decide which of us two is in the right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}In all these twenty years that have I been with you, your ewes and female goats have not miscarried their young, neither did I eat the rams of your flocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}I did not bring to you the animals which were killed by wild beasts; I bore the loss of it myself; from my hand you required compensation, whether stolen by day or stolen by night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}This was how I was: in the day the heat consumed me, and by night the frost, and sleep deserted me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}These twenty years I have been in your house; I served you fourteen years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock, and you have changed my wages ten times.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Unless the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the Fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely by now you would have sent me away empty. But God has seen my affliction and the labor of my hands, and he rebuked you last night.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then Laban answered Jacob, \uc1\u8220*The daughters are my daughters, and the children are my grandchildren, and the flocks are my flocks, and all that you see is mine, but what can I do today for these my daughters, or for their children whom they have borne?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Come, let us make a solemn agreement, I and you, and let there be a witness between me and you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}So Jacob took a stone, and set it up as a pillar,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}and said to the members of his family, \uc1\u8220*Gather stones.\uc1\u8221* When they had taken stones and made a heap, they ate there by the heap.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Laban called it Jegar-sahaduthap{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Heap of witness }; but Jacob called it Galeed{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Heap of witness }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8220*This heap\uc1\u8221*, Laban said, \uc1\u8220*is witness between me and you today.\uc1\u8221* This is why it was called Galeed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}and Mizpah{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Place of watching }, for Laban said, \uc1\u8220*May the {\scaps Lord} watch between me and you when we are absent one from another,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}so that you may not maltreat my daughters nor take other wives besides my daughters. No one is with us; but beware: God is witness between me and you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Moreover, Laban said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*See this heap, and the pillar which I have set up between me and you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}This heap is a witness and the pillar is a witness that I should not pass beyond this heap to you and that you must not pass beyond this heap and this pillar to me, with hostile intent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor\uc1\u8221* (the God of their ancestors) \uc1\u8220*judge between us.\uc1\u8221* And Jacob swore by the Fear of his father Isaac.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Then Jacob offered a sacrifice there on the mountain and called his kinsmen to eat bread, and they ate bread and spent the night on the mountain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}Then early in the morning Laban arose, and, when he had kissed his grandchildren and his daughters and blessed them, he departed and returned to his home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 32}Jacob went on his way and the messengers of God met him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When he saw them, Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*This is God\uc1\u8217*s camp;\uc1\u8221* so he named the place \uc1\u8220*Mahanaim{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Company }.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jacob prepares to meet Esau

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Jacob sent messengers before him to his brother Esau, to the land of Seir, which is the territory of the Edomites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He gave them this command, \uc1\u8220*Say to my lord Esau: \uc1\u8216*Your servant Jacob declares, I have lived with Laban and have stayed until now.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I have oxen and donkeys, flocks and male and female slaves, and I have sent to tell my lord, in order that I may win your favor.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The messengers returned to Jacob with the report, \uc1\u8220*We came to your brother Esau, even as he was coming to meet you with four hundred men.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then Jacob was greatly alarmed and worried. So he divided the people that were with him and the flocks and the herds and the camels into two parts{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and said, \uc1\u8220*If Esau comes to the one and attacks and destroys it, then the other which is left can escape.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Jacob also prayed, \uc1\u8220*God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, {\scaps Lord} who said to me, \uc1\u8216*Return to your country, and to your relatives, and I will do well by you,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies and all the faithfulness which you have shown to me, your servant. I passed over the Jordan river with only my staff, and now I have these two groups,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}deliver me, I pray, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear that he will come and attack me and kill the mothers and the children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Remember your promise to make me prosper and my descendants as many as the sand of the seashore, uncountable.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}After spending the night there, Jacob took from his livestock as a present for his brother Esau,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}thirty milch camels and their young, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty female donkeys and ten young donkeys.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}These he put, each drove by itself, in the care of his servants and said to them, \uc1\u8220*Go on before me and leave a space between the droves.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He gave those in front this command: \uc1\u8220*When my brother Esau meets you and asks you, \uc1\u8216*To whom do you belong? And where are you going? And whose are these before you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}then you shall say, \uc1\u8216*To your servant Jacob; it is a present sent by him to my lord Esau; and Jacob himself is just behind us.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jacob also commanded the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, to make the same answer,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and to say, \uc1\u8220*Jacob himself is just behind us.\uc1\u8221* For he said to himself, \uc1\u8220*I will please him with the present that goes before me, and then, when I meet him, perhaps he will welcome me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}So he sent the present over before him; but he himself spent that night in the camp.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Later that night he rose up and took his two wives, his two slave-girls, and his eleven children, and sent them over the river Jabbok.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jacob wrestles

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After he had sent them accross with all his belongings,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Jacob was left alone, and someone wrestled with him until daybreak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When he saw that he did not win against Jacob, he struck the socket of his hip, and the socket of Jacob\uc1\u8217*s hip was dislocated, as he wrestled with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then he said, \uc1\u8220*Let me go, for the dawn is breaking.\uc1\u8221* But Jacob replied, \uc1\u8220*I will not let you go unless you bless me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So he said to him, \uc1\u8220*What is your name?\uc1\u8221* He answered, \uc1\u8220*Jacob.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then he said, \uc1\u8220*Your name shall be no longer Jacob, but Israel{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  which means Struggler with God }; for you have struggled with God and with mortals and have won.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Jacob asked him, \uc1\u8220*Tell me, I pray, your name.\uc1\u8221* He said,\uc1\u8220*Why do you ask my name?\uc1\u8221* So he blessed him there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jacob called the place Penuel{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  which means Face of God }, for he said, \uc1\u8220*I have seen God face to face, and my life has been saved.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The sun rose as soon as he had passed beyond Penuel, and he limped because of his hip.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}This is why to this day the Israelites do not eat the thigh muscle, which is at the socket of the hip, because he touched the socket of Jacob\uc1\u8217*s hip on the thigh muscle.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Reconciliation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 33}When Jacob looked up, he saw Esau coming with four hundred men. So he divided the children between Leah and Rachel and the two slave-girls.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He put the slave-girls and their children in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and her son Joseph in the rear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Jacob himself went in front of them, and he bowed down to the ground seven times, as he drew near to his brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Esau ran to meet him, threw his arms about his neck, and kissed him, and they wept.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Esau looked up and saw the women and the children, he said, \uc1\u8220*Who are these with you?\uc1\u8221* Jacob answered, \uc1\u8220*The children whom God has so kindly given me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then the slave-girls with their children came up and bowed down to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Leah and her children also came and bowed down, and afterward Joseph and Rachel came up and bowed down before Esau.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Esau asked, \uc1\u8220*What do you mean by all this company which I met?\uc1\u8221* Jacob answered, \uc1\u8220*To win your friendship, my lord.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Esau said, \uc1\u8220*I have enough, my brother; keep what you have.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Jacob replied, \uc1\u8220*No, if now I have won your favor, receive this present from me, because seeing your face when you welcomed me was like seeing the face of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Take, I beg of you, the gift that I bring to you, for God has been generous to me and I have enough.\uc1\u8221* So he urged Esau until he took it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Esau said, \uc1\u8220*Let us set out on our way, and let me travel with you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But Jacob replied, \uc1\u8220*My lord knows that the children are delicate, and I have flocks and herds with their young; if they are overdriven one day, all the flocks will die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Let my lord, I beg of you, go on ahead of me, and I will proceed leisurely by stages according to the pace of the cattle which I am driving and of the children, until I come to my lord at Seir.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Esau said, \uc1\u8220*Let me at least leave with you some of the people who are with me.\uc1\u8221* But Jacob replied, \uc1\u8220*What need is there? Let me only enjoy the favor of my lord.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So Esau turned back that day on his way to Seir.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built there a house for himself, and made huts for his cattle; therefore the name of the place is called Succoth{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Huts }.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Dinah and Shechem
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now Jacob came in peace to the city of Shechem in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan-Aram, and encamped before the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He bought the piece of ground where he pitched his tent from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for four hundred shekels;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and he erected there an altar and called it El, God of Israel.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 34}Dinah the daughter of Leah and Jacob, went out to visit the women of the region.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When Sheeham the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the region, saw her, he took her and lay with her and violated her,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}but his heart was drawn to Dinah the daughter of Jacob \uc1\u8212* he loved her and spoke endearingly to her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Therefore Shechem said to his father Hamor, \uc1\u8220*Get me this girl for my wife.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Jacob heard that Shecham had defiled Dinah his daughter, his sons were with his cattle in the field, so Jacob said nothing until they came home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Meanwhile Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to speak with him and with his sons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The sons of Jacob came in from the field, and when they heard the news, the men were indignant and became very angry, because Shechem had committed a shameful crime in raping Jacob\uc1\u8217*s daughter: such a thing ought never to be done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Hamor said to them, \uc1\u8220*My son Shechem has set his heart on your daughter. I beg you: give her to him as a wife{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and intermarry with us. Give your daughters to us and take our daughters for yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then you can settle with us, and the land will be open before you. Remain, go about, and settle down in it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And Shechem said to Dinah\uc1\u8217*s father and to her brothers, \uc1\u8220*Let me find favor in your sight, and I will give you what you ask of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Demand of me an exceedingly large gift for yourselves and a dowry for the bride, and I shall give all you ask of me; only give me the girl for my wife.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, declaring, (because he had defiled their sister Dinah),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*We cannot do this. We cannot give our sister to someone who is uncircumcised, for that would be a disgrace to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Only on this condition will we make an alliance with you: if you will be as we are, in that every male of you be circumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then will we give our daughters to you and take your daughters to us and will live with you and we will become one people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But if you will not listen to us and allow yourselves to be circumcised, then we will take Dinah and be gone.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Their proposal pleased Hamor and his son Shechem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The young man (who was honored above all the house of his father) did not hesitate to do the thing demanded, because he was smitten with Jacob\uc1\u8217*s daughter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Hamor and his son Shechem came to the gate of their city, and conversed with the men of their city, saying,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*These men are peaceably disposed toward us, let them remain in the land and go about in it; the land is broad enough for them on every side and in every direction; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Only on this condition will these men consent to settle with us to become one people, namely, that every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Shouldn\uc1\u8217*t their cattle and their goods and all their beasts be ours? Let us make an alliance with them so that they will live with us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then all who went in and out of the gate of his city agreed with Hamor and Shechem. And every male was circumcised, all who went out of the gate of his city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}On the third day when they were still in pain, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah\uc1\u8217*s brothers, took swords and came upon the city unawares,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and put Hamor and his son Shechem to the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem\uc1\u8217*s house and went away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The other sons of Jacob came on the slain, and plundered the city, because they had defiled their sister.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They took their flocks and their herds and their donkeys and all that which was in the city and all that which was in the field.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}All their wealth, and all their children and their wives, they took captive, and made all that was in the houses their prey.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, \uc1\u8220*You have brought me into trouble, in that you have made me odious to the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. Since I have only a few people, if they gather themselves together against me they will attack me \uc1\u8212* and I and my house will be destroyed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But they replied, \uc1\u8220*Should he have treated our sister like a whore?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jacob goes to Bethel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 35}Then God said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*Arise, go up to Bethel, and live there. Make an altar there to God, who appeared to you when you fled from your brother Esau.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So Jacob said to his household, and to everyone who was with him, \uc1\u8220*Put away the foreign gods that are among you, and purify yourselves, and change your garments.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let us arise and go up to Bethel. I will make there an altar to God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me on the journey which I was making.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So they gave to Jacob all the foreign gods which were in their possession, and the rings which were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They set out on their journey, and a terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan (that is, Bethel). He and all the people that were with him came to Bethel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He built there an altar, and named the place El-Bethel{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  The God of the house of God }; because there God revealed himself to him, when he fled from the presence of his brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Deborah, Rebekah\uc1\u8217*s nurse, died, and was buried below Bethel under the oak. Therefore its name was called Allon-bacuth{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Oak of Weeping }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God appeared again to Jacob when he came from Paddanaram, and blessed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}God said to him, \uc1\u8220*Now your name is Jacob: but your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel.\uc1\u8221* So he called his name Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}God said to him, \uc1\u8220*I am God Almighty; be fruitful and become numerous; a nation and a multitude of nations will come from you, and kings will descend from you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and the land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give to you, and to your descendants after you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}God went up from him at that place where he spoke with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Jacob set up at the place where God had spoken with him, a pillar of stone, and poured a drink-offering and oil on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him, Bethel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then they set out from Bethel, and when they were still some distance from Ephrath, Rachel went into a hard and painful labor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At the hardest, the midwife said to her, \uc1\u8220*Do not be afraid; for now you will have another son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And, as her life was departing (for she was dying), she called his name Ben-oni{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Son of my Sorrow }; but his father called him Benjamin{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Son of the right hand }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Rachel died, and was buried on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and Jacob set up a pillar on her grave: that is the Pillar of Rachel\uc1\u8217*s Grave, which stands until this day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then Israel journeyed, and pitched his tent beyond Migdal-Eder{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Tower of the Flock }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}While Israel was living in that land, Reuben went and lay with his father\uc1\u8217*s concubine Bilhah and Israel heard of it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob\uc1\u8217*s firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}the sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and the sons of Bilhah, Rachel\uc1\u8217*s slave-girl: Dan and Naphtali;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and the sons of Zilpah, Leah\uc1\u8217*s slave-girl: Gad and Asher (these are the sons of Jacob, that were born to him in Paddan-aram).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then Jacob came to Isaac his father, to Mamre, near Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac had stayed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The length of Isaac\uc1\u8217*s life was a one hundred and eighty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Isaac beathed his last, and was gathered to his father\uc1\u8217*s kin, old and satisfied with life; and Esau and Jacob his sons buried him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 36}Now these are the descendants of Esau (that is, Edom).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Esau took his wives from the Canaanites: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and Basemath Ishmael\uc1\u8217*s daughter, sister of Nebaioth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Adah bore Eliphaz to Esau; and Basemath bore Reuel;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and Oholibamah bore Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah. These were the sons of Esau that were born to him in the land of Canaan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the members of his household and his cattle and all his beasts and all his possessionse which he had gathered in the land of Canaan and went into a land away from his brother Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For their possessions were too many for them to live together; and the land where they sojourned could not support them because of their cattle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So Esau dwelt in Mount Seir (Esau is Edom).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}These are the descendants of Esau the father of the Edomites in Mount Seir:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}these are the names of Esau\uc1\u8217*s sons: Eliphaz the son of Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife Adah, Reuel the son of Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife Basemath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Timna was the concubine of Esau\uc1\u8217*s son Eliphaz; and she bore Amalek to him. These are the sons of Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife Adah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}These are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. These were the sons of Basemath, Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}These were the sons of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife Zibeon she bore Jeush to Esau, and Jalam, and Korah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}These are the chiefs descended from Esau. The sons of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau: chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek. These are the chiefs descended from Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Adah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}These are the sons of Reuel, Esau\uc1\u8217*s son: chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah. These are the chiefs descended from Reuel in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Basemath, Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}These are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife: chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah. These are the chiefs that came of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau\uc1\u8217*s wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}These are the sons of Esau (that is, Edom), and these are their chiefs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the original inhabitants of the land: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan. These are the chiefs that came of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The sons of Lotan were Hori and Heman. Lotan\uc1\u8217*s sister was Timna.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}These are the sons of Shobal: Alvan and Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}These are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah; this is Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness, as he fed the donkeys of his father Zibeon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}These are the children of Anah: Dishon and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}These are the children of Dishon: Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}These are the children of Ezer: Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}These are the children of Dishan: Uz and Aran.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}These are the chiefs descended from the Horites: chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan. These are the chiefs that came of the Horites, according to their chiefs in the land of Seir.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}These are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the Israelites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead. The name of his city was Avith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his stead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife\uc1\u8217*s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}These are the names of the chiefs decended from Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names: chief Timna, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom, according to their settlements in the land they possessed. This was Esau, the father of the Edomites.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Joseph sold into slavery

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 37}Jacob made his home in the land of Canaan, where his father had lived as a resident foreigner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Joseph at the age of seventeen was a shepherd with his brothers, the sons of Bilhah and the sons of Zilpah, his father\uc1\u8217*s slave wives. He brought a bad report about them to their father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now Jacob loved his son Joseph, who was born in his old age; and he made him a long robe with sleeves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When his brothers saw that their father loved Joseph more than all his other sons, they hated him and could not speak to him in a friendly manner.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Joseph also had a dream and told it to his brothers, and they hated him still more.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}This is what he said to them, \uc1\u8220*Hear, if you will, this dream which I have had;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for as we were binding sheaves in the field, my sheaf rose up and remained standing, while your sheaves came around and bowed down to my sheaf.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}His brothers said to him, \uc1\u8220*Do you think you will be king over us? And rule us?\uc1\u8221* So they hated him still more because of his dreams and his words.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then he had another dream and told it to his brothers, saying, \uc1\u8220*I have had another dream, and it seemed to me that the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed down to me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But when he told it to his father and his brothers, his father reproved him and said, \uc1\u8220*What is this dream that you have dreamed? Am I and your mother and your brothers supposed to bow down to the earth before you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore his brothers envied him; but his father kept the matter in mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When his brothers went to pasture his father\uc1\u8217*s flocks in Shechem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Israel said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*Are not your brothers pasturing the flocks in Shechem? Come now, I will send you to them.\uc1\u8221* Joseph replied, \uc1\u8220*I am ready.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So his father said to him, \uc1\u8220*Go, see whether all goes well with your brothers and with the flock, and bring me back word.\uc1\u8221* So he sent him out from the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}There a man found him, as he was wandering in the field, and the man asked him, \uc1\u8220*What are you seeking?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He said, \uc1\u8220*I am looking for my brothers; tell me, please, where they are pasturing the flock.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The man said, \uc1\u8220*They have gone away, for I heard them say, \uc1\u8216*Let us go to Dothan.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* So Joseph went after his brothers and found them in Dothan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When they saw him in the distance, before he came to them, they conspired against him to kill him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They said one to another, \uc1\u8220*See, here comes that master-dreamer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Come on, let us kill him, and throw him into one of the pits, and then we will say, \uc1\u8216*A fierce beast has devoured him\uc1\u8217*; and we shall see what will become of his dreams!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Rueben, however, when he heard it, saved him from their hands by saying, \uc1\u8220*Let us not take his life.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Reuben also said to them, \uc1\u8220*Do not shed blood; throw him into this pit, that is in the wilderness; but do not harm him,\uc1\u8221* He planned to save him from their hands in order to restore him to his father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Nevertheless, when Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped him of his long robe, the robe with sleeves;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and they took him and threw him into the pit. But the pit was empty, there being no water in it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then they sat down to eat bread, and when they looked up they saw a caravan of Ishmaelites coming from Gilead, and their camels were loaded with spices, balm and myrrh on their way to carry it down to Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Judah said to his brothers, \uc1\u8220*What do we gain if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let us do him no violence, for he is our brother, our own flesh and blood.\uc1\u8221* So his brothers listened to him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and when the Midianite merchants passed by, pulled Joseph up from the pit and sold him for twenty pieces of silver to the Ishmaelites, who brought him to Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When Reuben returned to the pit and found Joseph gone, he tore his clothes in sorrow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}He went back to his brothers and said, \uc1\u8220*The boy is gone! What am I going to do?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then his brothers took Joseph\uc1\u8217*s robe, killed a he-goat, dipped the long-sleeved robe in the blood,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}tore it and sent it to their father, saying, \uc1\u8220*We found this; see whether it is your son\uc1\u8217*s robe or not.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He recognized it and said, \uc1\u8220*It is my son\uc1\u8217*s robe! A wild beast has devoured him! Joseph without doubt is torn in pieces.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then Jacob tore his clothes, put sackcloth about his waist, and mourned for his son many days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}All his sons and his daughters tried to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted, saying, \uc1\u8220*I shall go down to the grave mourning for my son.\uc1\u8221* So Joseph\uc1\u8217*s father wept for him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Meanwhile, the Midianites had sold Joseph in Egypt to one of Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s court officials, Potiphar, the captain of the guard.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Judah and Tamar

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 38}About that time Judah left his kinsmen, and settled near a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Judah saw there a daughter of a Canaanite whose name was Shua, and he married her. He lay with her,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and she conceived, and bore a son, and he named him Er.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then she conceived again, and bore a son and named him Onan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}She bore still another son, and named him Shelah: and it was at Chezib that she bore him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now Judah found a wife for Er his eldest son, and her name was Tamar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But Er, Judah\uc1\u8217*s eldest son, was wicked in the sight of the {\scaps Lord}, and the {\scaps Lord} took his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Judah said to Onan, \uc1\u8220*Go and lie with your brother\uc1\u8217*s wife, and perform the duty of a husband\uc1\u8217*s brother to her, and raise up offspring for your brother.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But Onan knew that the child would not be his; so whenever he lay with his brother\uc1\u8217*s wife, he spilled his semen on the ground, in order not to raise up offspring for his brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}What he did was evil in the sight of the {\scaps Lord}: therefore he took his life also.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter-in-law, \uc1\u8220*Remain a widow in your father\uc1\u8217*s house, until Shelah my son is grown up\uc1\u8221*; for he said to himself, \uc1\u8220*I will not let him marry her, he must not die like his brothers.\uc1\u8221* So Tamar went and lived in her father\uc1\u8217*s house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}After many days had passed, Shua\uc1\u8217*s daughter, the wife of Judah, died. When Judah had finished mourning, he went up to see about his sheep-shearers at Timnah, with his friend Hirah the Adullamite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Someone told Tamar, saying, \uc1\u8220*Behold, your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}She took off the garments of her widowhood, and covered herself with her veil. She sat, veiled, in the gate of Enaim, which is by the way to Timnah; for she saw that Shelah had grown up without her being given to him as wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a prostitute; because she had veiled her face.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So he turned aside to her by the roadside, and said, \uc1\u8220*Permit me, I pray you, to lie with you.\uc1\u8221* For he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, \uc1\u8220*What will you give me to lie with me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He said, \uc1\u8220*I will send you a young goat from the flock.\uc1\u8221* She said, \uc1\u8220*Will you give me a pledge, until you send it?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}He said, \uc1\u8220*What pledge should I give you?\uc1\u8221* And she said, \uc1\u8220*Your seal-ring and your chain and your staff that is in your hand.\uc1\u8221* So he gave them to her, and lay with her, and she became pregnant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And she got up, and went away, and took off her veil, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Now when Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the woman\uc1\u8217*s hand, he could not find her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He asked the men of her place, saying, \uc1\u8220*Where is the sacred prostitute, who was at Enaim by the wayside?\uc1\u8221* They replied, \uc1\u8220*There has been no sacred prostitute here.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So he returned to Judah, and said, \uc1\u8220*I have not found her; and the men of the place said, \uc1\u8216*There has been no sacred prostitute here.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Judah said, \uc1\u8220*Let her keep the pledge, otherwise we will be put to shame. I have sent this goat, and you have not found her.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Now after about three months, Judah was told, \uc1\u8220*Tamar your daughter-in-law has been acting like a whore and is pregnant.\uc1\u8221* Judah said, \uc1\u8220*Bring her forth and let her be burnt.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But when she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, \uc1\u8220*By the man to whom these things belong, I am with child.\uc1\u8221* She also said, \uc1\u8220*Look at them and see if you know whose these are, the seal-ring and the chain and the staff.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}When Judah recognized them, he said, \uc1\u8220*She is more in the right than I, because I did not give her to Shelah my son.\uc1\u8221* But he did not lie with her again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}When her time came to give birth, it was found that twins were in her womb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}While she was in labor, one put out a hand and the midwife took and bound on his hand a bright red thread, saying, \uc1\u8220*This one came out first.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}But he drew back his hand, and his brother came out, and she said, \uc1\u8220*What a breach you have made for yourself!\uc1\u8221* Therefore he was named Perez{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Breach }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Afterward his brother came out, who had the bright red thread on his hand; therefore he was named Zerah{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Red }.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Joseph in Egypt

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 39}Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and Potiphar, one of Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s officers, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him from the Ishmaelites who had taken him there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now the {\scaps Lord} was with Joseph, so that he prospered; and he remained in the house of his master the Egyptian.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When his master saw that the {\scaps Lord} was with him and made everything that he undertook prosper,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Joseph won his confidence and became his personal attendant. He also made him overseer of his household and placed all that he had in his care.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}From the time that he made him overseer in his house and over all that he had, the {\scaps Lord} blessed the Egyptian\uc1\u8217*s household for Joseph\uc1\u8217*s sake, and the blessing of the {\scaps Lord} was upon all that he had in the house and in the field.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Leaving all that he had in Joseph\uc1\u8217*s charge, he knew nothing about his affairs except about the food which he ate. Also Joseph was handsome and attractive.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After these honors had come to Joseph, his master\uc1\u8217*s wife directed her glances toward him and tried to tempt him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But he refused, saying to her, \uc1\u8220*See, my master knows nothing about what I do in the house, and he has put all that he has in my charge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}No one has greater authority in this house than I, and he has kept back nothing from me but you, because you are his wife. How then can I do this great wrong and sin against God?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Day after day she tempted Joseph, but he did not listen to her nor accept her advances.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}One day, however, when he went into the house to do his work and when none of the men of the household were at home,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}she caught hold of his garment and tried to seduce him; but he left his garment in her hand and fled out of the house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}she called to her household servants and said to them,\uc1\u8220*See, the master has brought a Hebrew in to insult us. He came to me to rape me, and I screamed loudly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and when he heard me scream, he left his garment with me and ran out of the house.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}She kept his garment by her until his master came home;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}then she told him the same story, saying, \uc1\u8220*The Hebrew slave whom you have brought to us came to me to insult me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and when I screamed he left his garment with me and fled.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When Joseph\uc1\u8217*s master heard the statements which his wife made to him, his anger was aroused;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and he took Joseph and put him into the prison, in the place where the king\uc1\u8217*s prisoners were confined. So he was left there in prison.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But the {\scaps Lord} was with Joseph and showed kindness to him and enabled him to win the favor of the keeper of the prison,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}so that he placed all the prisoners in Joseph\uc1\u8217*s charge and made him responsible for whatever they did there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The keeper did not have to concern himself about anything Joseph was responsible for, because the {\scaps Lord} was with him and gave him success in everything he did.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Two Dreams

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 40}Some time after these things the cupbearer of the king of Egypt and his baker offended their master the king of Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}so that Pharaoh was angry with these two officers and imprisoned them in the house of the captain of the guard, in the same prison where Joseph was confined.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The captain of the guard assigned Joseph to them, and he waited on them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and they remained in confinement for some time.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Meanwhile the king of Egypt\uc1\u8217*s cupbearer and baker, who were confined in the prison, both had dreams the same night, each with a particular meaning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When Joseph came in to them in the morning, he saw plainly that they were sad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he asked Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s officers, \uc1\u8220*Why do you look so sad today?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They answered. \uc1\u8220*We have had a dream and there is no one who can interpret it.\uc1\u8221* Then Joseph said to them, \uc1\u8220*Do not the interpretations of dreams belong to God? Tell them to me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph and said to him, \uc1\u8220*In my dream I saw a vine before me,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and on the vine were three branches, and as if budding it put out blossoms and its clusters brought forth ripe grapes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and pressed them into his cup and gave the cup to Pharaoh.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Joseph said to him, \uc1\u8220*This is its interpretation: the three branches are three days;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}within three days Pharaoh will release you from prison and restore you to your office, and you will give Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s cup into his hand as you used to do when you were his cupbearer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But when all goes well with you, remember me, show kindness to me and speak in my behalf to Pharaoh and bring me out of this house;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for I was unjustly stolen from the land of the Hebrews, and here also I have done nothing that they should put me in the dungeon.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was favorable, he said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*I also saw something in my dream: there were three baskets of white bread on my head,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and in the uppermost basket there were all kinds of baked food for Pharaoh, and the birds were eating them out of the basket on my head.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Joseph answered, \uc1\u8220*This is its interpretation: the three baskets are three days;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}within three days Pharaoh will take off your head and hang you on a tree, and the birds shall eat your flesh.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Now on the third day, which was Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s birthday, he made a feast for all his officials. Then he released the chief cupbearer and the chief baker.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He restored the chief butler to his office, so that he again gave the cup into Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s hand,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}but the chief baker he hanged, as Joseph had interpreted to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Yet the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph, but forgot him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s Dream

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 41}Two years later Pharaoh had a dream: as he stood by the Nile,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}he saw coming up from the Nile seven cows, good-looking and fat, and they had been feeding in the river grass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then seven other cows came up after them out of the Nile, bad-looking and lean, and they stood by the other cows on the bank of the Nile.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The bad-looking cows ate up the seven good-looking, fat cows. Then Pharaoh awoke.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Afterward he slept and had a second dream and saw seven ears, plump and good, growing up on one stalk.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Also seven ears, thin and blasted by the east wind, sprang up after them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The thin ears swallowed up the seven plump, full ears. Then Pharaoh awoke, and realized that it was a dream.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the morning Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s mind was disturbed; so he sent and called all the magicians and wise men of Egypt and told them his dreams, but no one could interpret them to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the chief cupbearer said to Pharaoh, \uc1\u8220*I now must remind you of my offenses:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Pharaoh was very angry with his servants and imprisoned me and the chief baker in the house of the captain of the guard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}We both had dreams the same night, each with a special meaning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}There was also with us a young Hebrew, a slave of the captain of the guard; and we told him and he interpreted our dreams to us, to each of us according to his dream.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Our dreams came true exactly as he interpreted them to us: I was restored to my office, but the other man was hanged.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Pharaoh sent for Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon; and he shaved his face and changed his clothes and came to Pharaoh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Pharaoh said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*I have had a dream, and there is no one who can interpret it. Now I have heard it said of you that when you hear a dream you can interpret it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Joseph answered Pharaoh, \uc1\u8220*Not I; God only can give Pharaoh a satisfactory answer.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*In my dream as I stood on the bank of the Nile,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I saw seven cows, fat and good-looking, which had been feeding in the river grass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There came up after them seven more cows, thin, and bad-looking and lean, worse than I ever saw in all the land of Egypt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and the lean and bad-looking cows ate up the first seven fat cows;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and when they had eaten them up, one could not tell that they had eaten them, for they were still as bad-looking as at the beginning. Then I awoke.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Again I dreamed and saw seven ears, plump and good, grow up on one stalk;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}then seven ears, withered, thin, blasted with the east wind, sprang up after them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and the thin ears swallowed up the seven good ears. I have told the dream to the magicians, but there is no one who can interpret it to me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Joseph said to Pharaoh, \uc1\u8220*Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s two dreams signify the same thing; God has made known to Pharaoh what he is about to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The seven good cows are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years. It is one dream.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The seven lean and ugly cows that came up after them are also seven years, and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind represent seven years of famine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}That is why I said to Pharaoh, \uc1\u8216*God has shown to Pharaoh what he is about to do.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Seven years of great plenty throughout the land of Egypt are coming,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and they will be followed by seven years of famine, so that all the plenty will be forgotten in the land of Egypt. The famine will consume all that the land produces;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and plenty will not be known in the land because of that famine which follows, for it will be very severe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*The dream came twice to Pharaoh to indicate that its fulfilment is assured and that God will soon make it come true.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Now therefore let Pharaoh select a man who is discreet and wise and place him in control of the land of Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Pharaoh should take action and appoint overseers over the land and collect one-fifth of all the produce of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Let them gather all the food of these good years that come and store the grain under the authority of Pharaoh, and let them hold it for food in the cities.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The food will furnish a supply for the land during the seven years of famine which will be in the land of Egypt, so that the people of the land will not perish because of the famine.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The plan pleased Pharaoh and all his officials;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}and Pharaoh said to his officials, \uc1\u8220*Can we find one like this, a man in whom is the spirit of God?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}So Pharaoh said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*Since God has shown you all this, there is no one so discreet and wise as you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}You will be at the head of my dominion, and all my people shall be ruled as you command, only on the throne I will be superior to you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}So Pharaoh said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*See, I have appointed you over all the land of Egypt.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Pharaoh took off his signet ring from his finger and put it upon Joseph\uc1\u8217*s finger and clothed him in garments of fine linen and put a golden collar about his neck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}He also made him ride in the second-best chariot which he had; and they cried before him, \uc1\u8220*Attention!\uc1\u8221* So he placed him over all the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Pharaoh also said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*I am Pharaoh, but without your consent no one may lift up hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Pharaoh named Joseph Zaphenath-paneah and gave him as a wife Asenath the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On. Josephs\uc1\u8217* authority was over all Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}and so at the age of thirty Joseph was commissioned by Pharaoh, king of Egypt and went out as the head of the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}In the seven plenteous years there were bountiful harvests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}and Joseph gathered up all the food of the seven plenteous years, which were in the land of Egypt, and stored the food in the cities, putting in each city the products of the fields about it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Joseph stored up grain as the sand of the sea, in great quantities, until he ceased to keep account, because it could not be measured.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Two sons were born to Joseph and Asenath before the year of famine came.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Joseph named the eldest Manasseh{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Making Forget }; for he said, \uc1\u8220*God has made me forget all my toil and all my father\uc1\u8217*s household.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}He named the second son Ephraim{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Fruitful }; for he said, \uc1\u8220*God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}When the seven years of plenty which had been in the land of Egypt were over,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}the seven years of famine began, as Joseph had said; and there was famine in all lands, but throughout the land of Egypt there was food,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}for when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread, and Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, \uc1\u8220*Go to Joseph and do what he tells you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}So when the famine was universal throughout the earth, Joseph opened all the storehouses and sold food to the Egyptians: but the famine was severe in the land of Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}The peoples of all lands came to Joseph in Egypt to buy grain, for the famine was severe throughout the world.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Joseph\uc1\u8217*s brothers come to Egypt

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 42}Jacob learned that there was grain for sale in Egypt, and he said to his sons, \uc1\u8220*Why do you stand looking at each other?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I have heard that there is grain for sale in Egypt; go down there and buy for us, so that we may live and not die.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Joseph\uc1\u8217*s ten brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph\uc1\u8217*s own brother, with his brothers; for he feared that some harm might come to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the sons of Jacob went among others to buy grain, for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now Joseph was the governor over the land; it was he who sold to all the people of the land. Therefore Joseph\uc1\u8217*s brothers came and bowed before him with their faces to the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When Joseph saw his brothers he knew them, but he acted as a stranger toward them and spoke harshly to them and said, \uc1\u8220*Where do you come from?\uc1\u8221* They said, \uc1\u8220*From the land of Canaan to buy food.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not know him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Joseph also remembered the dreams which he had dreamed about them and said to them, \uc1\u8220*You spies! You have come to find out the weaknesses of the land.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But they said to him, \uc1\u8220*No my lord; your servants have come to buy food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}We are all sons of one man; we are honest men; your servants are not spies.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But he said to them, \uc1\u8220*No, you have come to see the weaknesses of the land.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They replied, \uc1\u8220*We, your servants, are twelve brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; the youngest is today with our father, and one is no more.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Joseph said to them, \uc1\u8220*It is just as I said to you, you are spies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}By this you shall be tested: as sure as Pharaoh lives you shall not go away unless your youngest brother comes here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Send one of you, and let him bring your brother, while you remain in prison, that it may be proved whether you are telling the truth or not. Or else, as sure as Pharaoh lives, you are indeed spies.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So he put them all into prison for three days.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Joseph said to them on the third day, \uc1\u8220*Do this, and live, for I fear God:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}if you are honest men, let one of your brothers remain in prison, but you go, carry grain to supply the needs of your households{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and bring your youngest brother to me. So shall your words be verified, and you shall not die.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They did as Joseph commanded, but they said to one another, \uc1\u8220*We are indeed guilty because of the way we treated our brother, for when we saw his distress and when he pleaded with us, we would not listen; therefore this trouble has come upon us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Reuben added, \uc1\u8220*Did I not say to you, \uc1\u8216*Do not sin against the boy,\uc1\u8217* but you would not listen? Therefore now his very blood is required.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They did not know, however, that Joseph understood them, for he had spoken to them through an interpreter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But he turned away from them and wept; then he turned back and spoke to them, and, taking Simeon from among them, bound him before their eyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Joseph gave orders to fill their vessels with grain and to restore each man\uc1\u8217*s money to his sack and to give them provision for the journey; and it was done to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So they loaded their donkeys with their grain, and departed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}When they stopped for the night, one of them opened his sack to get feed for his donkey, and he saw the silver at the top of the sack.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}He said to his brothers, \uc1\u8220*My silver has been returned; here it is in my pack.\uc1\u8221* They were dismayed and fearful, and said to one another, \uc1\u8220*What has God done to us?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When they came to Jacob their father in the land of Canaan, they told him all that had happened, saying,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8220*The man who is master in that land spoke harshly to us and imprisoned us as spies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}We said to him, \uc1\u8216*We are honest men; we are not spies;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}we are twelve brothers, sons of the same father; one is no longer living, and the youngest is today with our father in the land of Canaan.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But the man who is master in that land said to us, \uc1\u8216*This is how I will discover if you are honest men: leave one of your brothers with me and take the grain to supply the needs of your households and depart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Bring your youngest brother to me; then I will know that you are not spies, but that you are honest men; and I will restore your brother to you and you shall be free to go about in the land.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}As they were emptying their sacks, they found that each man\uc1\u8217*s purse of money was in his sack; and when they and their father saw their purses filled with money, they were afraid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Jacob their father said to them, \uc1\u8220*You have robbed me of my children: Joseph is no longer living and Simeon is no longer here, and you would take Benjamin also. All this misfortune has overtaken me!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Reuben said to his father, \uc1\u8220*You may put my two sons to death, if I do not return him to you. Put him in my charge and I will bring him back to you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*My son must not go down with you, for his brother is dead and he only is left. If harm should come to him on the way by which you go, then you will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 43}The famine was severe in the land;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and when Joseph\uc1\u8217*s brothers had eaten all the grain which they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them, \uc1\u8220*Go again, and buy us some more grain.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Judah replied, \uc1\u8220*The man warned us: \uc1\u8216*You will not be able to see me unless your brother is with you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}If you will let our brother go with us, we will go down and buy you food,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}but if you will not let him, we will not go down; for the man said to us, \uc1\u8216*You will not be able to see me unless your brother is with you.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*Why did you treat me so badly by telling the man you had another brother?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They replied, \uc1\u8220*The man asked particularly about us and our relatives, saying, \uc1\u8216*Is your father still alive? Have you another brother?\uc1\u8217* So we answered his questions as he asked them. How were we to know that he would say, \uc1\u8216*Bring your brother down\uc1\u8217*?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Judah said to Israel his father, \uc1\u8220*Send the boy with me, and we will go at once, so that both we and you and our little ones may live and not die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will be surety for him, you can hold me responsible for him. If I do not bring him to you and set him before you, then let me bear the blame forever;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for if we had not lingered, surely we would now have returned the second time.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore their father said to them, \uc1\u8220*If it must be so, then do this: take some of the products of the land in your jars and carry down a present to the man, a little balm, a little honey, spices, myrrh, pistachio nuts, and almonds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Take twice as much money with you, carrying back the money that was returned in your sacks; perhaps there was a mistake.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Take also your brother and go again to the man,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and may God Almighty grant that the man may be merciful to you and release Benjamin and your other brother. But if I am robbed of my sons, I am bereaved indeed!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the men took the present and twice as much money and Benjamin, and went down to Egypt and stood before Joseph.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of his house, \uc1\u8220*Bring the men into the house, kill animals, and prepare the meal, for these men will eat with me at noon.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He did as Joseph directed, and brought the men into Joseph\uc1\u8217*s house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But the brothers were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph\uc1\u8217*s house, and they said, \uc1\u8220*We are being brought in on account of the money that was returned in our grain-saeks at our first visit, so that he can overpower and arrest us and take us as slaves, together with our donkeys.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So when they came near to Joseph\uc1\u8217*s steward, they spoke to him at the door of the house{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and said, \uc1\u8220*Oh, my lord, we came down the first time only to buy food;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and when we reached home, we opened our sacks and discovered every man\uc1\u8217*s money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in its full weight; and we have brought it back with us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}We have also brought down with us other money with which to buy food; we do not know who put our money into our sacks.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He replied, \uc1\u8220*Be calm, don\uc1\u8217*t be afraid; your God and the God of your father has given you the treasure in your sacks; I received your full payment.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Then he brought Simeon out to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The steward also conducted the men to Joseph\uc1\u8217*s house and gave them water with which to wash their feet, and he gave their donkeys fodder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then they made ready the present in anticipation of Joseph\uc1\u8217*s coming at noon, for they had heard that they were to eat there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}When Joseph came into the house, they gave him the present which they had brought and bowed down low before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He asked them regarding their welfare and said, \uc1\u8220*Is your father well, the old man of whom you spoke? Is he still living?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They replied, \uc1\u8220*Your servant, our father, is well; he is still alive.\uc1\u8221* Then they bowed their heads and made obeisance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When Joseph looked up and saw Benjamin his brother, his own mother\uc1\u8217*s son, he said. \uc1\u8220*Is this your youngest brother of whom you spoke to me?\uc1\u8221* and he added, \uc1\u8220*God be gracious to you, my son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then because he was overcome with emotion for his brother he sought a place to weep; and he went into his room and wept there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then he bathed his face and came out and controlling himself he said, \uc1\u8220*Bring on the food.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So they brought food for him by himself and for them by themselves and for the Egyptians who ate with him by themselves, because the Egyptians could not eat with the Hebrews, for to do so is abhorrent to the Egyptians.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Joseph\uc1\u8217*s brothers were seated before him, the eldest according to his right as the oldest and the youngest according to his youth; and the men looked at each other in astonishment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then Joseph had portions served to them from the food before him; but Benjamin\uc1\u8217*s portions were five times as much as any of theirs. So they drank and were merry with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 44}Then he gave this command to the steward of his household: \uc1\u8220*Fill the men\uc1\u8217*s grain-sacks with food, as much as they can carry,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and put my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the sack of the youngest and the money too that he paid for his grain.\uc1\u8221* He did as Joseph commanded.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}As soon as the morning light appeared, the men were sent away, together with their donkeys.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When they had gone out of the city, but were not yet far away, Joseph commanded his steward, \uc1\u8220*Follow after the men; and when you overtake them, say to them, \uc1\u8216*Why have you returned evil for good?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why have you stolen my silver cup, that from which my master drinks and by which he divines the future? You have done wrong in so doing!\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So the steward overtook them and said these words to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They said to him, \uc1\u8220*Why does my lord speak such words as this? Far be it from your servants that they should do such a thing!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Remember that we brought back to you from the hind of Canaan the money which we found in our sacks. Why then should we steal silver or gold from your master\uc1\u8217*s house?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If one of us is found with the goblet then let him die, and we will be my lord\uc1\u8217*s slaves.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He said, \uc1\u8220*Let it now be as you have said: he with whom it is found will be my slave; but the rest may go free.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then each one hastily took down his sack to the ground and opened it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and the steward searched, beginning with the oldest and ending with the youngest; and the cup was found in Benjamin\uc1\u8217*s sack.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then they tore their clothes in sorrow, and every man loaded his donkey and returned to the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Judah and his brothers came back to Joseph\uc1\u8217*s house, he was still there; and they threw themselves before him on the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Joseph said to them, \uc1\u8220*What deed is this that you have done? Do you not know that a man like me can divine secrets?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Judah replied, \uc1\u8220*What can we say, my lord? What can we plead or how can we clear ourselves? God has found out the iniquity of your servants. See, both we and he also in whose possession the cup was found are my lord\uc1\u8217*s slaves.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Joseph said, \uc1\u8220*Far be it from me that I should do such a thing! The man in whose possession the cup was found must be my slave; but you yourselves go up in peace to your father.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Judah came close to him and said, \uc1\u8220*My lord, let your servant, I beg of you, speak a word in my lord\uc1\u8217*s ears, and let not your anger be kindled against your servant; for you are as great as Pharaoh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}My lord, you asked us, \uc1\u8216*Have you a father or a brother?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And we said to you, \uc1\u8216*We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one. Since his brother is dead, he is the only son of his mother who is left; and his father loves him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}You said to us, \uc1\u8216*Bring him down to me, so that I can see him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But we said to you, my lord, \uc1\u8216*The boy cannot leave his father. If he should leave his father, his father would die.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then you said to us, \uc1\u8216*Unless your youngest brother comes down with you, you will not be able to see me again.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When we went up to your servant, my father, we told him your words, my lord;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and our father said, \uc1\u8216*Go again, buy us a little food.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But we said, \uc1\u8216*We cannot go down. If our youngest brother is with us, then we will go; for we cannot see the man unless our youngest brother is with us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And your servant, my father, said to us, \uc1\u8216*You know that my wife bore me two sons;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and one went missing, and I said that surely he was torn in pieces; and I have not seen him since.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}If you take this one also from me, and harm befall him, you will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Now if I return to your servant, my father, and the boy with whose life his heart is bound up is not with us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}then when he sees that there is no boy, he will die, and we, your servants will bring down the gray hairs of your servant our father with sorrow to the grave.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Indeed, my lord, I personally became surety for the boy to my father, when I said, \uc1\u8216*If I do not bring him to you, then I will bear the blame in my father\uc1\u8217*s eyes forever.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Now therefore let me, I beg of you, remain instead of the boy as your slave, my lord, but let the boy go up with his brothers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}For how can I go up to my father, if the boy is not with me, and see the pain and sorrow that would come upon my father.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 45}Then Joseph could not control himself before all those who were standing by him; so he cried out, \uc1\u8220*Let everyone leave me.\uc1\u8221* So nobody stood with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But he wept so loudly that the Egyptians and Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s court heard.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Joseph said to his brothers, \uc1\u8220*I am Joseph. Is my father still alive?\uc1\u8221* But his brothers could not answer him for they were frightened in his presence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then Joseph said to his brothers, \uc1\u8220*Come near to me, I beg of you.\uc1\u8221* So they came near. And he said, \uc1\u8220*I am Joseph your brother whom you sold into Egypt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Do not be troubled nor angry with yourselves that you sold me here, because God sent me before you to preserve life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For the famine has already been two years in the land, and there are still five years in which there will be neither ploughing nor harvest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}God sent me before you to keep you alive through a great deliverance and give you descendants on the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So now it clear that it was not you who sent me here, but God. He has made me like a father to Pharaoh and master of all his household and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*Go up quickly to my father and say to him, \uc1\u8216*Your son Joseph says: God has made me master of all Egypt, come down to me without delay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You will live in the land of Goshen, and you will be near me with your children and children\uc1\u8217*s children, with your flocks and your herds and all that you have,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and there I will provide for you. Otherwise you, together with your household and all that you have, will starve; for there will be five more years of famine.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Now you and my brother Benjamin see that it is really me, Joseph, who is speaking to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Tell my father all about my honor in Egypt and what you have seen, and you must quickly bring him down here.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he fell upon his brother Benjamin\uc1\u8217*s neck and wept, and Benjamin wept upon his neck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He also kissed all his brothers and wept with them; and after that his brothers talked with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The report that Joseph\uc1\u8217*s brothers had arrived spread in Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s palace, and it pleased Pharaoh and his servants greatly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Pharaoh said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*Say to your brothers, \uc1\u8216*Do this: load your beasts, go to the land of Canaan,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and take your father and your households and come to me, and I will give you the best of the land of Egypt, and you shall eat the best that the land affords.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Now you are commanded to do this: take wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives and bring your father and come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Also pay no attention to your household goods, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The sons of Jacob did as commanded.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
So Joseph gave them wagons according to Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s orders and provisions for the journey.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}To each of them he gave a change of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver and five changes of clothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}To his father he sent the following gifts: ten donkeys loaded with the best products of Egypt and ten donkeys loaded with grain and bread and provisions for his father on the journey.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So he sent his brothers away, and as they departed, he said to them, \uc1\u8220*See that you do not quarrel on the journey!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So they went up out of Egypt and came into the land of Canaan to Jacob their father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They told him, \uc1\u8220*Joseph is yet alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt!\uc1\u8221* Then Jacob\uc1\u8217*s heart stood still, for he could not believe them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But when they told him all that Joseph had said to them and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and he, Israel, said, \uc1\u8220*It is enough; Joseph my son is still alive. I will go and see him before I die.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The promise to Israel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 46}Then Israel set out on his journey with all that he had. He went to Beersheba and offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}God spoke to Israel in a vision by night and said, \uc1\u8220*Jacob, Jacob.\uc1\u8221* He answered. \uc1\u8220*Here I am.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then God said, \uc1\u8220*I am God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down into Egypt, for there I will make of you a great nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I myself will go down with you into Egypt; and I will surely bring you up again; and Joseph will be the one who closes your dying eyes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Jacob left Beersheba, his sons carried him and their little ones and their wives in the wagons that Pharaoh had sent to carry him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They took their herds and the possessions they had acquired in Canaan and went to Egypt, Jacob and all his family;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}his sons and grandsons, his daughters and his granddaughters, he brought all his family to Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Geneaology
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now these are the names of the Israelites, Jacob and his family, who came to Egypt. Reuben, Jacob\uc1\u8217*s firstborn,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and the sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanite woman.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah (but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan). Perez\uc1\u8217*s sons were Hezron and Hamul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puvah, Jashub, and Shimron.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The sons of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram, together with his daughter Dinah. He had thirty-three descendants by Leah in total.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The sons of Gad: Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah, their sister. The sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}These are the children of Zilpah, the slave-girl whom Laban gave to his daughter Leah. She bore sixteen children to Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The children of Jacob\uc1\u8217*s wife Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Joseph in the land of Egypt fathered Manasseh and Ephraim, whose mother was Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}These fourteen were Rachel and Jacobs\uc1\u8217* descendants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The sons of Dan: Hashum.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}These seven are the sons of Bilhah, the slave-girl whom Laban gave to his daughter Rachel. She bore seven children to Jacob.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}All the people belonging to Jacob who came into Egypt, who were his own offspring, not including the wives of his sons, were sixty-six in total.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Two sons were born to Joseph in Egypt; all the people of the house of Jacob who came into Egypt were seventy.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel in Egypt

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Jacob sent Judah before him to Joseph, so that he might show him the way to Goshen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When they came into the land of Goshen, Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to Goshen to meet Jacob his father, and when he presented himself to him Jacob fell on his neck and wept there a long time.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then Jacob said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*Now let me die, since I have seen your face and know that you are still alive.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But Joseph said to his brothers and to his father\uc1\u8217*s household, \uc1\u8220*I will go up and tell Pharaoh and will say to him, \uc1\u8216*My brothers and my father\uc1\u8217*s household who were in the land of Canaan have come to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Now the men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of cattle; and they have brought their flocks and cattle and all that they have.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}When Pharaoh calls you and asks, \uc1\u8216*What is your occupation?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}you must say, \uc1\u8216*We, your servants have been keepers of cattle all our lives, both we and our fathers,\uc1\u8217* so that you might be allowed to live in the province of Goshen, for shepherds are looked down upon by the Egyptians.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 47}Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, \uc1\u8220*My father and my brothers with their sheep and cattle and all that they possess have come from the land of Canaan; and now they are in the province of Goshen.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He took five of his brothers and presented them to Pharaoh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Pharaoh said to them, \uc1\u8220*What is your occupation?\uc1\u8221* And they said to Pharaoh, \uc1\u8220*We are shepherds, both we and our fathers.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They also said to Pharaoh, \uc1\u8220*We have come to live in the land, because there is no pasture for our flocks, for the famine is severe in the land of Canaan. We beg of you, to let us stay in the province of Goshen.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*Since your father and your brothers have come to you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}the land of Egypt is at your disposal. Settle them in the best part of it. Let them stay in the province of Goshen; and if you know any capable men among them, put them in charge of my cattle.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Joseph also brought in Jacob his father and presented him to Pharaoh; and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Pharaoh said to Jacob, \uc1\u8220*How many years have you lived?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Jacob answered, \uc1\u8220*I have lived a hundred and thirty years; few and hard have been the years of my life, and they have not been as many as those that my ancestors lived on earth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}After Jacob had blessed Pharaoh, he went out from Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s presence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So Joseph gave his father and his brothers a place to live in and a home in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, near Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Joseph also provided food for his father and his brothers and all his father\uc1\u8217*s household according to the number of their little children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There was no bread in all the land; since the famine was very severe, so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan languished because of the famine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Joseph gathered in all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the grain which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When the money was all spent in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said, \uc1\u8220*Give us bread: for why should we die before your eyes because our money fails?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then Joseph said, \uc1\u8220*Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money has failed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So they brought their cattle to Joseph, and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for the horses, the flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle, and the donkeys. That year he sustained them with bread in exchange for all their cattle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And when that year was ended, they came to him the second year, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*We will not hide from you, my lord, now that our money is all spent; and the herds of cattle are yours; there is nothing left in the your sight, but our bodies and our lands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Why should we perish before your eyes, both we and our land? Take possession of us and our land in return for bread, and we and our land will become personal possessions of Pharaoh; and give us seed, so that we will live, and not die, so that the land does not become desolate.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; because every Egyptian sold his field, because the famine was severe upon them. So the land became Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}As for the people, he reduced them to slavery from one end of Egypt to the other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Only the land of the priests he did not buy, because the priests had a definite allowance from Pharaoh, and ate their portion which Pharaoh gave them. Hence they did not sell their land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then Joseph said to the people, \uc1\u8220*I have bought you and you land today for Pharaoh. Here is seed for you, and you must sow the land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}At the ingatherings, you must give a fifth to Pharaoh, and four parts will be your own, for seed for the field, and for your food, and for those of your households, and for food for your little ones.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}They replied, \uc1\u8220*You have saved our lives; let us find favor in your sight, lord, and we will be Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s slaves.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So Joseph made it a law, still in force today, that Pharaoh should have a fifth; only the land of the priests did not come into the possession of Pharaoh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The Israelites lived in Egypt, in the land of Goshen, and they acquired possessions in it and had many children and became exceedingly numerous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Jacob lived for seventeen years in Egypt and died at the age of one hundred and twenty-seven.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Deaths of Jacob and Joseph

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When the time drew near for Jacob to die, he called his son Joseph and said to him, \uc1\u8220*If now you will do me a favor, put your hand under my thigh and swear that you will act kindly and faithfully with me. Do not bury me, I beg of you, in Egypt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}but when I lie down to sleep with my ancestors, carry, me out of Egypt and bury me in their burying-place.\uc1\u8221* Joseph replied, \uc1\u8220*I will do as you have requested.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Jacob said, \uc1\u8220*Give me your oath\uc1\u8221*; so Joseph gave him his oath; and Israel bowed toward the head of the bed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 48}Now after these things, Joseph was told, \uc1\u8220*Your father is sick.\uc1\u8221* So he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When Jacob was told, \uc1\u8220*Your son Joseph has come to you.\uc1\u8221* Jacob rallied his strength and sat up on the bed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Jacob said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and said to me, \uc1\u8216*I will make you fruitful, and numerous, and I will make of you a company of peoples, and will give this land to your descendants after you for an everlasting possession.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now your two sons, who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you into Egypt will be mine just as Reuben and Simeon are mine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But your offspring, which you father after them, will be yours. Their inheritance will come from their older brothers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As for me, when I came from Paddan, Rachel died to my sorrow in the land of Canaan on the way, some distance from Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem).\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Israel saw Joseph\uc1\u8217*s sons, he said, \uc1\u8220*Who are these?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Joseph said to his father, \uc1\u8220*They are my sons, whom God has given me here.\uc1\u8221* Israel said, Bring them, I pray you, to me, and I will bless them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. So Joseph brought them near to him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Israel said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*I had not thought to see your face; and now God has let me see your offspring as well.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Joseph took them from his father\uc1\u8217*s lap, and bowed with his face to the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So Joseph took them both \uc1\u8212* Ephraim with his right hand toward Israel\uc1\u8217*s left hand and Manasseh with his left hand toward Israel\uc1\u8217*s right hand \uc1\u8212* and brought them near to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it upon the head of Ephraim who was the younger and his left hand upon the head of Manasseh, crossing his hands intentionally, for Manasseh was the eldest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He then blessed Joseph, saying, \uc1\u8220*The God whom my forefathers Abraham and Isaac revered and served, the God who has been my shepherd all my life long unto this day,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}the messenger who has delivered me from all evil, bless the boys; and let them be known as descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and let them grow into a multitude on the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him, and he seized his father\uc1\u8217*s hand to remove it from Ephraim\uc1\u8217*s head to Manasseh\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Joseph said to his father, \uc1\u8220*Not so, my father; this one is the eldest; put your right hand upon his head.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But his father refused and said, \uc1\u8220*I know, my son, I know, he also will become a people, and he will shall be great, but his younger brother will be greater than he, and his descendants shall become a populous nation.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So he blessed them that day and said, \uc1\u8220*The Israelites will invoke a blessing like your own, saying, \uc1\u8216*God make you like Ephraim and like Manasseh.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* So he put Ephraim before Manasseh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jacob said to Joseph, \uc1\u8220*See, I am about to die; but God will be with you, and bring you back to the land of your fathers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As well I give you a mountain-slope which I took out of the power of the Amorites with my sword and bow.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 49}Jacob summoned his sons and said, \uc1\u8220*Come near, so I can tell you what will happen to you in days to come.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Assemble, sons of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and listen to Israel your father.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Reuben you are my firstborn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
my strength and the first-fruit of my manhood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
First in dignity and strength.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Boiling over like water, you will not be first,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For you climbed into my concubine\uc1\u8217*s the bed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you defiled your father\uc1\u8217*s couch.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Simeon and Levi are akin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
weapons of violence are their swords.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will not enter into their council,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}My heart will not join in their assembly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for men in their anger they slew.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and oxen in their wantonness they hamstrung.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Accursed is their anger that it is so fierce,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their wrath because it is so cruel;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will divide them in Jacob
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and scatter them in Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Judah, your brothers praise you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Your hand is on the neck of your enemies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Before you your father\uc1\u8217*s sons bow down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Judah is a whelp of a lion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
From the kill, my son, you have returned;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He has crouched, he has lain down as a lion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as an old lion, who will disturb him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The sceptre will not pass from Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor the royal staff from between his feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and to him is due the obedience of the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Binding his donkey to the vine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and his colt to the choice vine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he has washed his garments in wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and his clothing in the blood of grapes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}His eyes are red with wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and his teeth are white with milk.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Zebulun, he lives by the seashore;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he is by a shore that is lined with ships,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and his border extends to Sidon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Issachar, he is a strong-limbed donkey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
crouching down between the sheepfolds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and when he saw the resting place was good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
that the land also was pleasant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he bowed his shoulder to bear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and became a slave under a taskmaster.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Dan, he judges his own people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as one of the tribes of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Dan is a serpent by the way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a horned-adder beside the path
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
that bites the horse\uc1\u8217*s heel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so that his rider is thrown off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I have waited for your deliverance {\scaps Lord}!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Gad, robber-bands press upon him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but he also will press upon their heel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Asher, his food is rich,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and he provides royal dainties.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Naphtali, he is a flourishing terebinth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
that sends forth beautiful branches.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Joseph, he is a fruitful branch,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a fruitful branch by a spring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his tendrils run over the wall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They bitterly attack, they shoot at him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The archers hatefully assail him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But his bow remains ever bent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his forearms tireless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
through the power of the Mighty One of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In the name of the Shepherd of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}the God of your fathers, who will help you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and God Almighty, who blesses you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
with blessings of heaven above,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and of the great deep that lies beneath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
With blessings of the breast and womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}with blessings of your father,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
with blessings of the everlasting mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
with the gifts of the ancient hills!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They will be on the head of Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
on the head of the consecrated among his brothers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Benjamin is a ravening wolf.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In the morning he devours prey.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and at evening divides the spoil.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}These are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father said to them and blessed them; each accordingto his blessing he blessed them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}He instructed them, \uc1\u8220*I am to be gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field from Ephron the Hittite for the purpose of holding it as a burying-place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The field and the cave that is in it which was purchased from the children of Heth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}When Jacob had finished giving these instructions to his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, breathed his last and was gathered to his ancestors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 50}Joseph fell upon his father\uc1\u8217*s face and wept over him and kissed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father. So the physicians embalmed Jacob;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and forty days were devoted to it, for this is the full period for embalming.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The Egyptians also mourned for him seventy days.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When the days of mourning for him were past, Joseph spoke to the members of Pharaoh\uc1\u8217*s court, saying, \uc1\u8220*If now you wish to do me a favor, speak to Pharaoh and say, Joseph\uc1\u8217*s father made him take an oath, saying, \uc1\u8216*See, I am dying; bury me in my grave which I prepared for myself in the land of Canaan.\uc1\u8217* Ask Pharaoh, \uc1\u8216*Let me go up, I beg of you, and bury my father; after that I will return.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Pharaoh said, \uc1\u8220*Go up and bury your father, as he made you take an oath.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So Joseph went up to bury his father; and with him went all the officials of Pharaoh, the elders of his household, all the elders of the land of Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}all the household of Joseph, his brothers, and his father\uc1\u8217*s household. Only their little ones, their sheep, and their cattle they left in the land of Goshen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There went up with him both chariots and horsemen, so that it was a very great company.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, they held there a great and impressive lamentation; and Joseph appointed a period of mourning for his father which lasted seven days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land, saw the mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, they said, \uc1\u8220*This is an impressive mourning among the Egyptians.\uc1\u8221* That is why that place across the Jordan is called, Ebel-Mizraim{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn  Mourning of the Egyptians }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Jacob\uc1\u8217*s sons did for him what he had commanded them:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}they carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave in the field of Machpelah near Mamre which Abraham bought with the field from Ephron the Hittite to hold as a place of burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}After he had buried his father, Joseph and his brothers and all who had gone up with him to bury his father returned to Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When Joseph\uc1\u8217*s brothers realized that their father was dead, they said, \uc1\u8220*It may be that Joseph will now hate us and fully punish us for all the evil which we did to him!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They sent this message to him: \uc1\u8220*Your father commanded before he died,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Tell Joseph: Forgive, I beg of you, the wrongdoing and sin of your brothers, for they treated you basely.\uc1\u8217* So now we beg of you forgive the wrongdoing of the servants of your father\uc1\u8217*s God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
While they were speaking to him, Joseph began to weep,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}his brothers also went and fell down before him and said, \uc1\u8220*See, we are your slaves.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But Joseph said to them, \uc1\u8220*Do not be afraid; for am I in the place of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You plotted mischief against me, but God intended it for good, in order to accomplish what is now being done, the saving of the lives of many people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Now therefore do not be afraid; I will provide for you and your little ones.\uc1\u8221* He said this kindly, comforting them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Joseph remained in Egypt with his father\uc1\u8217*s family. He lived a hundred and ten years,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and he saw Ephraim\uc1\u8217*s great-grandchildren; the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were borne upon Joseph\uc1\u8217*s knees.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then Joseph said to his brothers, \uc1\u8220*I am about to die, but God will surely remember you and bring you up from this land to the land which he promised by an oath to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Joseph required an oath of the children of Israel, saying, \uc1\u8220*When God remembers you, as he surely will, then you must carry up my bones from here.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years old; and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
\par}

}