{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Nehemiah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 The Book of Nehemiah 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}Now it transpired in the month of Chislev, in the twentieth year (of Artaxerxes), as I was in Shushan the royal palace, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}that Hanani, one of my kinsmen came, together with certain men from Judah, and I asked them concerning the Jews who had escaped, who were left from the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And they said to me, The survivors who are left from the captivity there in the provinces are in great misfortune and reproach, and the wall of Jerusalem is broken down and its gates have been destroyed by fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now when I heard these statements I sat down and wept and mourned certain days; and I fasted and made supplication before the God of heaven,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and I said, I beseech thee, O Jehovah, the God of heaven, the great and terrible God, who keepeth the covenant and showeth kindness to them who love and keep his commands;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}let thine ears now be attentive and thine eyes open, to hear the supplication of thy servant, which I am now making before thee, day and night,  for the Israelites thy servants, while I confess the sins of the Israelites, which we have sinned against thee, as I also and my father\uc1\u8217*s house have sinned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}We have dealt very wickedly against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the ordinances, which thou didst command thy servant Moses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Remember, I beseech thee, the word which thou didst command thy servant Moses, saying, "If ye trespass I will scatter you abroad among the peoples;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but if ye return to me, and keep my commands and do them, then, though your outcasts were at the ends of the earth, yet will I gather them thence and will bring them to the place that I have chosen, there to cause my name to dwell."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power and by thy strong hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}O Lord, I beseech thee, let thine ear be attentive to the supplication of thy servant, and to the supplications of thy servants, who delight to fear thy name; and give success to thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. Now I was cupbearer to the king.{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}And it came to pass in the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when I had charge of the wine, that I took up the wine and gave  it to the king. Now I had not beforetime been sad. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And the king said to me, \uc1\u8217*Why is your countenance sad, since you are not sick? This is nothing else but sorrow heart.\uc1\u8217* Then I was greatly afraid, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and I said to the king, \uc1\u8217*Let the king live forever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my father\uc1\u8217*s sepulchres, lies in ruins, and its gates have been destroyed by fire?\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And then the king said to me, \uc1\u8217*For what do you make a request?\uc1\u8217* So I prayed to the God of heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And I said to the king, \uc1\u8217*If it please the king, and if your servant had found favor in your sight, that you would send me to Judah, to the city of my father\uc1\u8217*s sepulchres, that I may rebuild it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the king said to me (and the queen was also sitting by him), \uc1\u8217*For how long will you return?\uc1\u8217* Then it pleased the king to send me; for I set him a time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Moreover I said to the king, If it please the king, let official letters be given me to the governors of the province beyond the River, that they may let me pass through until I come to Judah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and a letter to Asaph the keeper of the king\uc1\u8217*s park, that he may give me the timber to make beams for the gates of the castle, which belongs to the temple,  and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter. And the king granted me this, according to the hand of my God which kindly cared for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then I came to the governors of the province beyond the River, and gave them the king\uc1\u8217*s official letters. Now the king had sent with me military officers  and horsemen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah, the Ammonite slave, heard of it, it troubled them exceedingly, that one had come to seek the welfare of the  Israelites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So I came to Jerusalem and was there three days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And I arose in the night, together with a few of my followers, and I told no man what my God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem, neither was there any beast with me, except the beast upon which I rode. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And I went out by night through the Valley Gate, toward the Dragon\uc1\u8217*s Well and to the Dung Gate, and investigated carefully the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and where its gates had been destroyed by fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then I went on to the Fountain Gate and to the King\uc1\u8217*s Pool, but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then I went up in the night by the Brook Kidron and investigated carefully the wall, then I turned back and entered by the Valley Gate, and so returned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the rulers did not know where I went or what I did, neither had I as yet told it to the Jews nor to the priests nor to the rulers nor to the rest  who did the work.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then I said to them, \uc1\u8217*You see the bad condition in which we are, how Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates are destroyed by fire. Come and let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more an object of reproach.\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And I told them of the hand of my God, which had kindly cared for me, as also the king\uc1\u8217*s words that he had spoken to me. And they said, \uc1\u8217*Let us rise and  up and build.\uc1\u8217* So they strengthened their hands for the good work. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But when Sanballat, the Horonite and Tobiah, the Ammonite slave, and Geshem the Arabian heard it, they jeered at us and despised us, and said, \uc1\u8217*What is  this thing that you are doing? Will you rebel against the king?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then I answered and said to them, \uc1\u8217*The God of heaven, he will give us success, for we his servants will proceed to build; but you shall have no portion  nor right nor memorial in Jerusalem.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his kinsmen the priests and built the Sheep Gate; they laid its beams and set up the doors, even to the Tower of  Hundred, and to the Tower of Hananel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And next to him the men of Jericho built. And the next to them Zaccur the son of Imri built.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And the Fish Gate the sons of Hassenaah built; they laid its beams, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And next to them Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, repaired (the wall). And next to them Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezebel,  repaired. And next to them Zadok the son of Baaba repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And next to them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles did not bend their necks in the service of their lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the Old Gate, Joida the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah repaired; they laid its beams, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And next to them Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah, which belongs to the jurisdiction of the governor of the province beyond the River, repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Next to him Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, one of the goldsmiths, repaired. And next to hi Hananiah, one of those who prepare sweet ointments, repaired. And     they fortified Jerusalem even to the broad wall. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And next to them Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, repaired.  {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And next them Jedaiah the son of Harumaph repaired opposite his house. And next to him Hattush the son of Hashabneiah repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Malchijah the son of  Harim and Hasshub the son of Pahath-moab repaired another section even to the Tower of the Furnaces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And next to him Shallum the son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, together with its dependencies, repaired.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The Valley Gate, Hanum and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired; they built it, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and also built a thousand  cubits of the wall to the Dung Gate. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the Dung Gate, Malchijah the son of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem, together with his sons repaired; they built it, and covered it, and set up its doors, and its bolts, and its bars.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And the Fountain Gate Shallum the son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah, repaired; and he built it, and covered it, and set up its doors, and its bars, and he also built the wall of the Pool of Siloam by the King\uc1\u8217*s Garden, even to the stairs that go down from the city of David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}After him Nehemiah the son of Azbuk the ruler of half the district of Bethzur, repaired to the opposite the Sepulchres of David, even to the pool that was made and to the House of the Warriors. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}After him the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani repaired. Next to him Hashabiah, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, repaired for his district.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}After him their kinsmen, Bennui the son of Henadad the ruler of half the district of Keilah, repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And next to him Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, repaired another section opposite the ascent to the armory at the bend in the wall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}After him Baruch the son of Zabbai repaired from the bend in the wall to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.  {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}After him Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, repaired another section, from the entrance to the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And after him the priests, the men of the Plain of the Jordan repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After them Benjamin and Hasshub repaired opposite their house. After them Azariah the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, repaired beside his own house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}After him Binnui the son of Henadad repaired another section, from the house of Azariah to the bend in the wall and to the corner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}After him Palal the son of Uzai repaired opposite the bend and the upper tower that stands out from the royal palace of the king, which is toward the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And the temple servants dwelt in Ophel, to the place opposite the Water Gate toward the east and the tower that stands out. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}After him the Tekoites repaired another section, opposite the great tower that stands out and to the wall of Ophel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Above the Horse Gate the priests repaired, each one opposite his own house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}After them Zadok the son of Immer repaired opposite his own house. After him Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of the East Gate, repaired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}After him Hananiah the son of Shelemiah and Hanum the sixth son of Zalaph repaired another section. After him Meshullam the son of Berechiah repaired opposite his chamber.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}After him Malchijah one of the goldsmiths repaired as far as the house of the temple servants and of the merchants, opposite the Gate of the Watch Tower and to the ascent of the corner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And between the ascent of the corner and the Sheep Gate the goldsmiths and the merchants repaired.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Now when Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, his anger was aroused and he was very indignant, and mocked the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And he spoke before his kinsmen and the army of Samaria and said, \uc1\u8217*What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they leave it to God? Will the sacrifice?  Will they complete it in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, although they are burned?\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now Tobiah the Ammonite was with him, and he said, \uc1\u8217*Even that which the are building, if a fox should go up on it, he would break down their stone wall!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Hear, O our God--for we are despised--and turn back their reproach upon their own head and give them up as an object of spoil in a land of captivity,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and cover not their iniquity and let not their sin be blotted out from thy sight, for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So we built the wall; and all the wall was joined together to half its height, for the people were eager to work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But when Sanballat and Tobiah and the Arabians and the Ammonites and the Ashdodites, heard that the restoration of the walls of Jerusalem was progressing,  so that the breaches began to be stopped, they were very angry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And they all conspired together to come and fight against Jerusalem and to produce a panic therein. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But we made supplication to our God, and set a watch as a protection against them day and night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the Judean community, said, \uc1\u8217*The strength of the burden-bearers is broken, for there is much rubbish; so that we shall not be able to rebuild the wall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And our adversaries have said, "They shall neither know nor see, until we come into their midst and slay them and bring the work to a standstill."{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And it came to pass that when the Jews who dwelt by them came, they said to us ten times, \uc1\u8217*From all the places where they dwell they will come up against us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore I stationed in the lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in the protected places, I set there the people by their families with their swords,  their spears, and their bows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And when I saw their fear, I rose up and said to the nobles and to the rulers and to the rest of the people, \uc1\u8217*Be not afraid of them. Remember the Lord, who is great and terrible, and fight for your kinsmen, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your homes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And when our enemies heard that their plan was known to us and God had brought it to nought, we all of us returned to the wall, each to his own work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And from that time on, while half of my servants were engaged in the work, half of them held the lances, the shields, the bows, and the coats of mail; and the rulers stood behind all the house of Judah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Those who built the wall and those who bore burdens were also armed, each with one of his hands engaged in the work, and with the other was ready to grasp his spear; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and each of the builders had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And he who sounded the trumpet was by me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And I said to the nobles and the rulers and to the rest of the people, \uc1\u8217*The work is great and extensive, and we are separated upon the wall far from each other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In whatever place you hear the sound of the trumpet, gather there to us; our God will fight for us.\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}So we were active in the work, while half of them held the lances from the appearance of the gray of morning until the stars came out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Also I said at that time to the people, Let each man with his servant lodge in Jerusalem, that they may be a guard to us by night and may labor by day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So neither I, nor my kinsmen, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard who accompanied me, not one of us took off our clothes, each had his spear in his hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Then ther was a loud complaint from the common people and their wives against their fellow-countrymen the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For there were those who were saying, \uc1\u8217*We must give our sons and our daughters in pledge to secure grain that we may eat and live.\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}some also there were who were saying, \uc1\u8217*We must mortgage our fields and our vineyards and our houses,  that we may get grain because of the dearth.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}There were also those who were saying, \uc1\u8217*We have borrowed money for the king\uc1\u8217*s tribute.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brothers, our children as their children; but now, we must bring our sons and our daughters into  slavery, and some of our daughters have already thus been brought into bondage, neither is it in our power to help it, for our fields and  our vineyards belong to the nobles.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then I was very angry when I heard their complaint and these statements.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And I took counsel with myself, and contented with the nobles and rulers, and said to them, \uc1\u8217*You exact usury each of his brother,\uc1\u8217* And I held a great assembly against them. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And I said to them, \uc1\u8217*We ourselves have, according to our ability redeemed our fellow-countrymen the Jews, who have been sold to the heathen; and would you yourselves sell your fellow-countrymen, and should they sell themselves to us?\uc1\u8217* Then they were silent and could not find a word to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Therefore I said, \uc1\u8217*The thing that you are doing is not good. Ought you not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of the  heathen our enemies?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For I also, my kinsmen and my servants, lend them money and grain. Let us, therefore, leave off this usury.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}restore to them this day their fields, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the usury of the money and of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, that you exact from them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then they said, \uc1\u8217*We will restore them and will demand nothing from them; we will do just as you say.\uc1\u8217* Then I called the priests and took an oath of them, that they would do according to this promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Also I shook out of the fold of my garment, and said, \uc1\u8217*So may God shake out every man from his house and from the fruit of his labor, who does not fulfil this promise; even thus may he be shaken out and emptied.\uc1\u8217* And all the assembly said, \uc1\u8217*So may it be.\uc1\u8217* And they praised Jehovah. And the people did according to this promise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even to the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes the king, that is for tweve years, I and my brethren had not eaten the bread which was due me as governor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But the former governors who were before me were a source of expense to the people, and took of them bread and wine, and also forty shekels of silver each day; and furthermore their servants oppressed the people. But I did not so, because of the fear of God. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I also devoted myself to this work on the wall, and we did not buy any land; and all my servants were gathered there for the work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Also the Jews and the rulers, a hundred and fifty men, besides those who came to us from among the surrounding nations, were at my table.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now that which was prepared for each day was one ox and six choice sheep and  fowls. These were prepared at my expense, and once in ten days wine in abundance for all the people. Yet with all this I did not demand the  bread which was due me as a governor, because the public service rested heavily upon this people. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Remember to my credit, O my God, all that I have done for this people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Now when it was reported to Sanballat and to Tobiah and to Geshem the Arabian and to the rest of our enemies, that I had rebuilt the wall and that there was no breach left in it--though even to that time I had not set up the doors in the gates--{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying, \uc1\u8217*Come, let us meet together in one of the villages on the plain of Ono.\uc1\u8217* But they planned to do me injury.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So I sent messengers to them, saying, \uc1\u8217*I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down; why should the work cease, while I leave it and come down to you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And they sent to me in this way four times, and I gave them the same answer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Sanballat sent his servant to me in the same way the fifth time with an open letter in his hand, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}in which was written, \uc1\u8217*It is reported among the nations, and Gashmu confirms it, that you and the Jews plan to rebel, and that this is the reason you are building the wall, and that you would be their king, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and that you also have appointed prophets to preach of you at Jerusalem, saying, "There is a king in Judah." And now it will be reported  to the king to this effect. COme now, therefore, and let us take counsel together.\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then I sent to him, saying, \uc1\u8217*No such things have been done as you say, but you have devised them in your own mind.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For they all would have made us afraid, thinking, \uc1\u8217*Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it may not be done.\uc1\u8217* But now, O God,  strengthen thou my hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And when I went to the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabel, who was shut up at home, he said, \uc1\u8217*Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple: for they are coming to slay you in the night; yes, in the night they are coming to slay you!\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And I said, \uc1\u8217*Should such a man as I flee? And how could anyone like me (a layman) enter the chief room of the temple and still live? I will not enter.\uc1\u8217* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then I perceived and it was clear that God had not sent him; but he pronounced this prophecy against me, because Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}that I should be alarmed and act accordingly and sin; and it would have given them occasion for an evil report, that they might reproach me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Remember, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their acts, and also the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the prophets  who would have made me afraid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the wall was finished in the twenty-fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty-two days. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And when all our enemies heard, all the surrounding nations feared and fell in their own esteem, for they perceived that this work had been done by our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters to Tobiah, and those of Tobiah came to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For many in Judah had taken oath to him, because he was the son-in-law of Shechaniah the son of Arah and his son Jehohanan had taken  the daughter of Meshullam, the son of Berechiah, as wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Also they praised his goods deeds before me and reported my words to him. Then Tobiah sent letters to make me afraid. . . .
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Now when the wall had been built and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites had been appointed, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I placed my brother Hanani and Hananiah the commander of the castle in charge of Jerusalem; for he was a faithful man, and more God-fearing than many.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And I said to them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun is hot; and while watchmen are still on guard, let them shut the doors and bar them. Also appoint watches consisting of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch and each opposite his own house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now the city was wide and large; but there were few people in it, and the households were not large.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore my God put it into my mind to gather together the nobles and the rulers and the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}These are the children of the province, who went up out of the captivity of those who had been carried  away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his city, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 The Number of Men of the People of Israel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The children of Parosha, two thousand a hundred and seventy-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The children of Shephatiah, three hundred and seventy-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The children of Arah, six hundred and fifty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and eighteen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred and fifty-four.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The children of Zattu, eight hundred and forty-five.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The children of Binnui, six hundred and forty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The children of Bebai, six hundred and twenty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred and twenty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty-seven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The children of Bigvai, two thousand and sixty-seven. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The children of Adin, six hundred and fifty-five.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight. The children of Azzur, four hundred and thirty-two. The children of Hananiah, a hundred and one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The children of Hashum, three hundred and twenty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The children of Bezai, three hundred and twenty-four.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The children of Hariph, a hundred and twelve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The children of Nebo, fifty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred and fifty-four.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}The men of Gibeon, ninety-five.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, a hundred and eighty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The men of Anathon, a hundred and twenty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The men of Beth-azmaveth. forty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three. The men of Adasa  and Modin, four hundred and twenty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred and twenty-one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The men of Bethel and Ai, a hundred and twenty-three.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The men of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five. The men of Keilah and Azekah, sixty-seven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The men of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-one.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The priests: The chilren of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred and seventy-three.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}The children of Immer, a thousand and fifty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred and forty-seven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}The Levites: The children of Jershua, namely of Kadmiel, of Benui, of Hodevah, seventy-four.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}The singers: The children of Asaph, a hundred and forty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}The porters: The children of Shallum, the children of After, the children of Talmon, the  children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, a hundred and thirty-eight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}The temple servants: The children of Ziha, the children of Hasupa, the children of Tabbaoth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}the children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}the children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Akkub, the children of Salmai,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}the children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}the children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}the children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}the children of Besai, the children of Asnah, the children of Menunim, the children of Nephsheism.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}the children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}the children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}the children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Temah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}the children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}The children of Solomon\uc1\u8217*s servant: The children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children  of Perida,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}the children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children the Giddel, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}the children of Shephatiah, the children of Hatiil, the children of Pochereth-hazzabaim, the children of Amon. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}All the temple servants and the children of Solomon\uc1\u8217*s servants were three hundred and ninety-two.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}And these were they who went up from Tel-melah and Tel-harsha: Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but they  could not slow their fathers\uc1\u8217* houses not their descent, whether they were of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred and forty-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}And of the priest: The children of Hobaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called by their name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}These sought their register among those who were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore they were excluded from the priesthood, as unclean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}And the governor commanded them not to eat of the most holy things, until a priest stood up with the  Urim and Thummim. 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}besides their male and female slaves, of whom there seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven. And they had two hundred and forty-five singing men and singing women.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}Their horses were seven hundred and thirty-six; their mules, two hundred and forty-five; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}their camels, four hundred and thirty-five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}And some from among the heads of fathers\uc1\u8217* houses gave the work. The governor gave to the treasury a thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, five hundred minas of silver and thirty priests\uc1\u8217* garments.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}And some of the heads of fathers\uc1\u8217* houses gave into the treasury for the work, twenty thousand darics of gold and two thousand, two hundred minas of silver. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold and two thousand minas of silver and sixty-seven priests\uc1\u8217* garments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 73}So the priests and the Levites and the porters and the singers and the common people, and the temple servants, and  all Israel dwelt in their cities. And when the seventh month drew near, the Israelites were settled in their cities, 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}all the people gathered themselves together as one man to the broad place that was before the Water Gate. And they spoke to Ezra the priest and scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly of men and women, and all who could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And he read from it before the open place that was before the Water Gate from early morning until mid-day, in the presence of the men and women and of those who could understand; and all the people were attentive to the book of the law. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And Ezra the priest and scribe stood upon a wooden pulpit, which they made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithaiah, Shema, Anaiah, Azariah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maasieah, on his right hand, and on his left, Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum,  Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people--for he was above all the people--and when he opened it all the  people stood up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And Ezra blessed Jehovah, the great God. And all the people answered, Amen, Amen, while they lifted up their hands and bowed their heads and worshipped Jehovah with their faces to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Also Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, the Levites, instructed the people in the law, and the people remained in their place. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And they read in the book of the law of God by sections, and made the sense so clear that they understood the reading.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest, the scribe and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people, This day is holy to Jehovah your God; mourn not, nor weep; for all the people wept when they heard the words of the law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then he said to them, Go away, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions to him for whom nothing is prepared, for  this day is holy to our Lord; and do not be troubled, for the joy of Jehovah is your bulwark.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So the Levites quited all the people, saying, Be still, for the day is holy, and do not be troubled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And all the people went away to eat and drink and to send portions and to make a great rejoicing, for they had understood the  words which had been made known to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And on the second day the heads of fathers\uc1\u8217* houses of all the people, the priests and the Levites were gathered together to  Ezra the scribe, in order to gain an insight into the words of the law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And they found written in the law, how Jehovah had commanded by Moses that the Israelites dwell in booths at the feast in the seventh month;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and that they should proclaim aloud in all their cities and in Jerusalem: Go forth to the mount and bring olive branches and  branches of wild olive and myrtle and palm branches and branches of thick trees to make booths, as it is prescribed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So the people went out and brought them, and made themselves booths, each man upon the roof of his house and in their courts and in the courts of the house of God and in the open space at the Water Gate and in the open space at the Ephraim Gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And all the assembly of those who had come back from  the captivity made booths and lived in the booths; for since the  days of Joshua the son of Nun to that day the Israelites had not done so. And  there was very great gladness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And day by day, from the first to the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they celebrated the feast seven days, and on the eighth day, as was the custom, there was a concluding solemn assembly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Now in the twenty-fourth day of this month the Israelites were assembled with fasting, and with sackcloth and earth upon their heads.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And the descendants of Israel had separated themselves from all foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their fathers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And they stood up in their place and read in the book of the law of Jehovah their God a fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confessed and worshipped Jehovah their God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the Levites, Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, and Chenani stood on the raised pulpit and cried with a loud voice to Jehovah their God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Also the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless Jehovah our God from everlasting to everlasting; and blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And Ezra said, Thou art Jehovah, even thou alone; thou hast made heaven and the heavens of heavens with all their host, the earth and all things that are on it, the seas and all that is in them, and thou preservest them all and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Thou art Jehovah the God, who didst choose Abraham and bring him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and didst give him the name of  Abraham, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and find his heart faithful before thee and make a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the  Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give it to his descendants, and hast performed thy words, for thou art righteous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And thou didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt and heard their cry by the Red Sea,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and didst show signs and wonders upon Pharaoh and upon all his servants, and upon all the people of his land; for thou knewest that they acted extravagantly toward them; and didst get thee a name as it is this day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land;  and thou didst cast their pursuers into the depths, as a stone into the mighty waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Moreover by a pillar of cloud thou leddest them by day, and by a pillar of fire by night, to give them  light by the way in which they should go.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Thou camest down also upon Mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them right ordinances and true laws, good statutes and commandments, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and madest known to them thy holy sabbath, and gavest them commandments and statutes and a law by Moses thy servant, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and commandest them that they should go in to possess the land which thou hadst sworn to give them. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But they and our father acted arrogantly and hardened their neck and heeded not thy commands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders which thou didst among them, but hardened their neck, and set their head to return to their bondage in Egypt. But thou wast a God ready to pardon, gracious  and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and didst not forsake them. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yea, when they made for themselves a molten calf and said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and acted very blasphemously, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}yet thou in thy great mercy didst not forsake them in the wilderness; the pillar of cloud departed not  from over them by day, to lead them in the way, nor the pillar of fire by night, to give them light on the way in which they should go.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, and they lacked nothing: their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and peoples, which thou didst allot, so they possessed the land of Sihon king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Thou didst also make their children as numerous as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land concerning which thou didst say to their fathers, that they should go in to possess.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou didst subdue before them the Canaanitish inhabitants of the land, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings and the peoples of the land, that they might do with them what they would.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And they took fortified cities and a fertile land, and possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns  hewn out, vineyards, oliveyards, and fruit-trees in abundance. So they ate and were filled, and became fat and lived luxuriantly in thy great goodness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Nevertheless they were disobedient and rebelled against thee and cast thy law behind their back and slew thy prophets, who testified against them to turn them again to thee, and they acted very blasphemously,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Therefore thou didst deliver them into the hands of their oppressors, who oppressed them. Then in the  time of their trouble, when they cried to thee, thou heardest from heaven, and according to thy great mercy thou didst give them deliverers who saved them out of the power of their adversaries.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But as soon as they had rest, they did evil again before thee; therefore thou didst leave them in the  hands of their enemies, so that they ruled over them; yet when they again cried to thee, thou didst hear from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them according to they mercy,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and testifiedst against them, that thou mightest bring them to thy law. Yet they acted arrogantly and heeded not thy commands, but sinned against thine ordinances--which if a man obey, he shall live--and turned a stubborn shoulder and stiffened their neck and would not hear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Yet many years didst thou bear with them, and testify against them by thy spirit through thy prophets, yet they would not heed. Therefore thou gavest them into the hands of the peoples of the lands. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Nevertheless in thy great mercy thou didst not completely destroy nor forsake them, for thou art a gracious and merciful God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and kindness, let  not all the affliction seem little before thee, that hath come on us, on our kings, our nobles, our priests,  our prophets, our fathers, and on all thy people, since the days of the kings of Assyria to this day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}However thou art just in all that has come upon us; for thou  hast done right, but we have done wickedly, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}neither have our kings, our nobles, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law nor heeded thy commands and thy testimonies with which thou didst testify again them. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For they have not served thee in the time of their kingly rule, and in spite of thy great goodness that thou gavest them, they have not turned from their wicked deeds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Behold, we this day are slaves, and as for the land that thou gavest to our fathers to eat its fruit and enjoy its good gifts, see we are only slaves in it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And it yieldeth a great income to the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sin; also they  have power over our bodies and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Moreover in addition to all this we made a fixed covenant and wrote it out, and our nobles, our Levites, and our priests were enrolled upon the sealed document.{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}And those enrolled upon the sealed documents were Nehemiah, the governor, the son of Hachaliah, and Zedekiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these were the priests.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And the Levites, namely, Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and their kinsmen, Shekaniah, Hodaviah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Hodijah Bani, Beninu.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The chiefs of the people: Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Adonijah, Bigyai, Adin,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Ahiah, Hanan, Anan, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the temple servants, and all those who had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands to the law of God, their wives, their sons, and  their daughters, every one who had knowledge and insight,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}strongly supported their kinsmen, their nobles, and entered into a solemn obligation and took oath to walk  in God\uc1\u8217*s law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and  do all the commands of Jehovah our Lord, and his ordinances and his statutes; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and that we would neither give our daughters to the people of the land nor take their daughters as wives for  our sons;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and that, if the peoples of the land should bring wares or any given on the sabbath day to sell, we would not buy of them on the sabbath or on a holy day; and that on the seventh year we would leave the land uncultivated and  would refrain from the exaction of any debt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}We also imposed upon ourselves the obligation to give yearly the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}for the bread that was set forth, and for the continual burnt-offering, for the sabbaths, the new moons, the fixed feasts, and the holy things, and for the sin-offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}And we cast lots, the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood-offering, to bring it into the house of our God, according to our father\uc1\u8217*s houses, at appointed times year by year, to burn upon the altar of Jehovah our God, as it is prescribed in the law;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and to bring the earliest products of our ground, and the first of all fruit or every kind of tree year by year, to the temple of Jehovah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}also the first-born of our sons and of our cattle, as is prescribed in the law, and the firstlings of our  herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of God to the priests who minister in the house of our God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and that we should bring the first bread baked of our dough, our gifts, the fruit of every kind of tree, the  new wine and the oil, to the priests, in the chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our ground to the Levite; and that they, the Levites, should receive the tithes in all the cities of our agricultural districts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And that the priest the son of Aaron should be with the Levites, when the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the chambers, into the store-house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}For the Israelites and the sons of Levi shall bring the gifts of grain, of new wine, and of oil, into the  chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests who minister and the porters and the singers, and that we would not neglect the house of our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}And the princes of the people dwelt in Jerusalem, and the rest of the people cast lots, to bring one out of every ten to dwell in Jerusalem the  holy city, while nine-tenths remained in the villages.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And the people blessed all the men who volunteered to dwell in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now these are the chiefs of the province who dwelt in Jerusalem; but in the cities of Judah every man dwelt in his possession in their cities: Israel, the priests, the Levites, the temple servants, and the children of Judah and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephthiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the children of Perez.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}All the sons of Perez who dwelt in Jerusalem were four hundred and sixty-eight valiant men. And of the sons of Zerah: Jeual and their clansmen, six hundred and ninety.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of  Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shelanite.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And these are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son  of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And his clansmen were mighty warriors, nine hundred and twenty-eight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Joel the son of Zichri was appointed over them; and Judah the son of Hassenuah was second in charge of the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Of the priests: Jedaiah, Joiarib, Jachin,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the  house of God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and their clansmen who did the work of the house, eight hundred and twenty-two; and Adaiah the son of  Jeroboam, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and his clansmen, chiefs of fathers\uc1\u8217* houses, two hundred and forty-two; and Amasai the son of Azarel, the  son of Ahzai, the son of Meshilemoth, the son of Immer, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and his clansmen, mighty warriors, a hundred and twenty-eight; and Zabdiel the son of Haggedolim was appointed over them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chiefs of the Levites, who had the oversight of the outside work of the  house of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zikri, the son of Asaph, who was the leader of the songs of praise, and Bakbukiah was the second among his clansmen; and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred and eighty-four.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their kinsmen, who kept watch at the gates, were a hundred and  seventy-two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But the temple servants dwelt in Ophel; and Ziha and Gishpa were over the temple servants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The one appointed over the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of  Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, over the work of the house of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For there was a command from the king concerning them, and a settled provision for the singers, as each day  required.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And Pethliah the son of Meshezebel, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, advised the king in all matters concerning the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And the rest of Israel, of the priests, the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, each in his inheritance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And as to the estates with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt in Kiriath-arba and its dependent villages, in Dibon and its dependent villages, in Jekabzeel and its estates, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}in Jeshua, in Moladah, in Beth-pelet,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}in Hazar-shual, and in Beersheba and its dependent villages, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}in En-rimmon, in Zorah, in Jarmuth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Zanoah, Adullam and their estates, Lachish and its fields, Azekah and its dependent villages. so they had their places of temporary abode from Beersheba to the valley of Hinnom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The children of Benjamin also dwelt at Geba, Michamash, Aija, Bethel, and its dependent villages, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Lod, and Ono, the valley of the craftsmen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And of the Levites, certain divisions in Judah were joined to Benjamin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Now these are the priests and the Levites who went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua, Seraiah,  Jeremiah, Ezra, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Shecaniah, Harim, Meremoth, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Iddo, Ginnethon, Abijah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Mijamin, Maaziah, Bilgah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs of the priests and of their clansmen in the days of Jeshua.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, he and his clansmen were in charge of the thanksgiving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Also Bakbukiah and Unno, their brethren, stood over against them in performing the duties of their office.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And Jeshua begat Joiakim, and Joiakim begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and Jeoiada begat Johanan, and Johanan begat Jaddua. 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And in the days of Joiakim, the priests, the heads of fathers\uc1\u8217* houses: of Seraiah, Meraiah, of Jeremiah, Hananiah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}of Ezra, Meshullam; of Harim, Adna; of Meremoth, Helkai;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Maadiah, Piltai; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}of Sallu, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Of the Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded the heads of the fathers\uc1\u8217* houses; also the priests until the reign of Darius the Persian.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The sons of Levi, heads of fathers\uc1\u8217* houses, were written in the Book of the Chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And the chiefs of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, Jeshua, Bennui, and Kadmiel with their clasmen Mattaniah, and  Bakbukiah, Obadiah over against them, to praise and give thanks, according to the command of David the man of God, one  division following another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meshallam, Talmon, and Akkub, the porters, kept watch over the storerooms at the gates.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and  of Ezra the priest, the scribe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And at the dedication of the walls of Jerusalem they sought out the Levites from all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem to celebrate the dedication with gladness, with hymns of thanksgiving, and with singing, with cymbals, harps, and zithers. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And the members of the Levitical guilds, the singers, assembled, both from the Plain of the Jordan and round about Jerusalem and from the villages of the Netophathites  {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and from Beth-gilgal and from the fields of Geba and Azmaveth; for the singers had built themselves villages round about Jerusalem. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And the priests and the Levites purified themselves; and they purified the people and the gates and the wall. 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then I had the rulers of Judah take their position upon the wall, and I appointed two great companies that gave thanks, and the first went to the  right hand upon the wall toward the Dung Gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And behind them went Hoshaiah and half of the nobles of Judah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, Jeremiah, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and certain of the priests\uc1\u8217* sons with trumpets: Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}and his kinsmen, Shemaiah, Azarel, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God. And Ezra the  scribe was before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And by the Foundation Gate, they went straight up the stairs of the city of David, at the ascent of the wall, above the house of David, even to the Water Gate on the east.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And the other company of those who gave thanks went to the left, and I after them, with the half of the nobles of the people, upon the wall,  above the Tower of the Furnaces, even to the broad wall, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and above the Gate of Ephraim and by the Old Gate and by the Fish Gate and the Tower of Hananel and the Tower of the Hundred, even to the Sheep Gate; and they stood in the Gate of the Guard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}So the two companies of those who gave thanks in the house of God took their position, and I, and the half of the rulers with me; {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}and the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loudly with   Jezrahiah their leader. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And they offered great sacrifices that day and rejoiced; for God had made them exceeding joyful; and the women also and the children rejoiced,  so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard afar off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}And in that day men were appointed in charge of the chambers for the storehouse, for the gifts, for the first-fruits, and for the tithes, to  gather into them, according to the fields of the cities, the portions appointed by the law for the priests and the Levites; for Judah had joy in  the priests and the Levites who attended to the service. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}And they took charge of the service of their God and of the purification, and so did the singers and the porters, according to the command of David and of Solomon his son. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}For in the days of David and Asaph were the leaders of the singers appointed, and songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah gave the portions of the singers and the porters, as each required; and they delivered the sacred offerings to the Levites the sons of Aaron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}On that day it was read from the book of Moses in the hearing of the people, and it was found written there that an Ammonite and a Moabite should never enter into the assembly of God, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for they did not meet the Israelites with bread and water but hired Balaam against them to curse them; but our God turned the curse into a blessing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And when they had heard the law, they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now before my return from the king, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God, being related to Tobiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}had prepared for him a great chamber, where formerly they had stored the cereal-offerings, the incense, the vessels, and the tithes of grain, the new wine, and the oil, which were given by command to the Levites, the singers, the porters, and the gifts for the priests.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But during this time I had not been at Jerusalem; for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon I went to the king. Then after some time I asked leave of the king, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and I came to Jerusalem and discovered the crime that Eliashib had committed for the sake of Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the court of the house of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And it displeased me greatly; therefore I cast all the household possessions of Tobiah out of the chamber.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then I gave command that they should cleanse the chambers, and I brought there again the vessels of the house of God, with the cereal-offerings  and the incense.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them; so that the Levites and the singers, who performed the service had each fled to his field.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then I contented with the rulers and said, \uc1\u8217*Why is the house of God forsaken?\uc1\u8217* And I gathered them together and placed them at their posts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And all Judah brought the tithe of the grain and the new wine and the oil into the store-rooms.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And I appointed in charge of the store-rooms: Shelemiah the priest and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites Pedaiah; and next to them was  Hanan, the son of Zaccur the son of Mattaniah; for they were considered faithful, and their business was to distribute to their kinsmen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Remember me, O my God, concerning this and forget not all my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for its services. 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}At that time I saw in Judah some men treading wine-presses on the sabbath and bringing in heaps of grain and loading asses, as also wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of burdens, and that they were bringing them into Jerusalem on the sabbath; and I warned them when they sold provision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Tyrians also dwelt therein, who  brought in fish and all kinds of wares, and sold on the sabbath to the inhabitants of Judah and in Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then I contented with the nobles of Judah and said to them, \uc1\u8217*What evil thing is this that you are doing, and thereby profaning the sabbbath?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Did not your fathers do thus and did not our God bring all this calamity upon them and upon us and upon this city? Yet you bring more wrath  upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}According when it began to be dark, the gates of Jerusalem were shut before the sabbath; and I gave command that they should not be opened until after the sabbath. And I placed some of my servants in charge of the gates, and commanded that no burden should be brought in on the sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So the merchants and sellers of all kinds of wares spent the night without Jerusalem once or twice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then I warned them and said to them. \uc1\u8217*Why do you spend the night before the wall? If ye do so again, I will lay hands on you.\uc1\u8217* From that  time forth they came no more on the sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And I commanded the Levites that they should purify themselves and that they should come and guard the gates, to keep the sabbath holy.  Remember, O my God, this also to my credit and show me mercy according to the greatness of thy loving-kindness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At that time also I saw the Jews who had married women of Ashod, of Ammon, and of Moab.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And their children spoke half in the language of Ashdod, but none of them could speak in the Jews\uc1\u8217* language, but according to the language of each people. {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And I contented with them and cursed them and struck some of them and pulled out their hair and made them swear by God, saying, \uc1\u8217*You shall not give  your daughters to their sons nor take their daughters as wives for your sons or for yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these acts? Yet among many nations there was no king like him, and he was beloved by his God, and God made  him king over all Israel; nevertheless foreign women led him into sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Shall it also be reported of you that you do all this great evil, to trespass against our God in marrying foreign women?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was the son-in-law of Sanballat the Horonite; therefore I chased him from me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the covenant of the priesthood and of the Levites.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Thus I cleansed them from all foreigners and fixed the duties for the priest and the Levites, each for his appointed task, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and bringing of wood for the service at appointed times, and the first-fruits. Remember it, O my God, to my credit.
\par}

}