{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Hosea (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Hosea

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message to Hosea son of Beeri during the reigns of Kings Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah of Judah and during the reign of King Jeroboam, son of Joash of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The adultery of Hosea\uc1\u8217*s wife

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the {\scaps Lord} began to speak through Hosea, he said to him:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Go marry an unfaithful woman
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who will bear you children by her adultery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for like an adulterous wife the land is unfaithful to the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So he married Gomer, the daughter of Dibliam, and when she conceived and bore him a son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}the {\scaps Lord} said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Call him \uc1\u8216*Jezreel,\uc1\u8217* for in a little while
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will punish the dynasty of Jehu
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for the blood shed at the valley of Jezreel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will cause the kingdom of Israel to cease.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On that day, I will break Israel\uc1\u8217*s bows and arrows
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in the valley of Jezreel.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When she conceived again and bore a daughter, the {\scaps Lord} said to Hosea:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Call her Lo-Ruhamah \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*No-Compassion\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for I will no longer have compassion on Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
certainly not spare them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But on Judah I will have compassion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will deliver them by the {\scaps Lord} their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but I will not deliver them by bow nor by sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor by battle nor by horses nor by horsemen.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}After she had weaned No-Compassion, and when she conceived and bore a son, he said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*Call him Lo-Ammi \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Not-My-People\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for you, Israel, are not my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I indeed am not your God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Yet the number of the Israelites
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
will be as the sand of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
which cannot be measured or counted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and where they were told, \uc1\u8220*You are not my people,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will be called, \uc1\u8220*children of the living God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The Judeans and the Israelites
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
will join together again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
will appoint for themselves one leader,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
will return to their own land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Great will be the day of Jezreel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}So call your brothers, My People,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and your sisters, Compassion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Accuse, accuse your mother:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for she is not my wife,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I will not be her husband.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Let her put her acts of infidelity out of her sight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and her lovers from between her breasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}else I will strip her bare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
expose her as she was on the day of her birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
make her like the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
let her become like a parched land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and let her die of thirst.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And on her children I will have no pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
since they are children of adultery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for their mother has become a prostitute,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
she who conceived them has behaved shamefully.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
She has said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I will go after my lovers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who gave me my bread and my water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
my wool, my flax, my oil, and my drink.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}That is why I am going to hedge up her ways with thorns,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and build a wall about her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so that she cannot find her paths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}She will pursue her lovers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but will not overtake them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
She will seek them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but not find them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In time she will say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I will go back to my first husband,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I was better off then than now.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}She herself did not know
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
that it was I who gave her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the grain, the sweet wine, and the oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who lavished on her silver and gold \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
that they used in worshipping Baal!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9} So I will take back my grain at the harvest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and my sweet wine in its season.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will withdraw my wool and my flax,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
given to cover her nakedness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and so I will strip her naked before her lovers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and no one shall deliver her out of my hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will end all her celebrations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
her yearly feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
all her festivals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will lay waste her vines and her fig trees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
of which she says, \uc1\u8220*These are my wages
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
which my lovers have given me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will make them a thicket,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the wild animals will eat them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In this way I will punish her for the days of the Baals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in which she made offerings to them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and decked herself with earrings and jewels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and went after her lovers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but forgot me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8211* declares the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So I am going to court her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
bring her into the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and speak tenderly to her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will give her from there her vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the valley of Achor as a door of hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There she will respond as in the days of her youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as in the days when she came up from the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At that time, declares the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you will call me your husband,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and will no more call me your master.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will remove the name of the Baals from her mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their names never again uttered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}On that day I will make for them a covenant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
with the wild animals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the birds of the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the creatures that crawl on the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will break the bow and the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
banish battle from the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I will make them lie down in safety.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I will take you for my wife forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will take you for my wife in righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in justice, in kindness, and in mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I will take you for my wife in faithfulness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and you will know the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On that day I will answer
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8211* declares the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will answer the empty skies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will answer the dry earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The earth will answer with grain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and new wine and oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will answer Jezreel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and I will plant her in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will have compassion to No-Compassion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will say to Not-My-People, \uc1\u8220*You are my people,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will say, \uc1\u8220*You are my God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Then the {\scaps Lord} said to me, \uc1\u8220*Go again, show love to this woman, who is loved by another, who commits adultery. Love her as the {\scaps Lord} loves the Israelites, though they turn to other gods, and love the raisin cakes offered to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So I redeemed her for fifteen pieces of silver and a homer and a lethek of barley.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And I told her, \uc1\u8220*You must live with me for many days and you must not sleep around or marry another. And I will do the same for you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And like this the Israelites will live for a long time without king and without prince, without sacrifice and without pillar, without ephod and without teraphim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet afterward the Israelites will return, and seek the {\scaps Lord} their God and their Davidic king, and in the days to come they will turn with awe to the {\scaps Lord} and his goodness.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s case against Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Hear the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message, Israelites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} has brought charges against the inhabitants of the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for there is no fidelity, nor true love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor knowledge of God in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}but cursing, lying, and murder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
stealing, committing adultery, and deeds of violence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and acts of bloodshed quickly follow each other.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore the land mourns,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
all its inhabitants languish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the wild animals and the birds of the skies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
even the fish of the sea are dying.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet let no one bring charges,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
let none accuse,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for your people are like those,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who bring charges against a priest{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You stumble by day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the prophet stumbles with you by night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I will destroy your mother.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}My people are being destroyed for lack of knowledge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because you have rejected knowledge
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I reject you from being priest to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Since you have forgotten the teaching of your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I also will forget your children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The more priests there are, the more they sin against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will change their dignity to dishonor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They feed on the sin offerings of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so they hunger after their guilt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thus it comes to be, like people, like priest:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will visit upon each punishment for their ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their deeds I will repay them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They will eat and not be satisfied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will sleep around but stay childless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because they have abandoned the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to give themselves to{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}prostitution.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Old and new wine take away the understanding.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}My own people ask counsel of a piece of wood!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A stick gives them advice!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For a spirit of prostitution has led them astray,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they commit adultery against their God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On the heights of the mountains they sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and on the hills they burn incense
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
under oaks and poplars and terebinths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for their shade is so pleasant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Therefore your daughters become cult prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will not punish your daughters for committing prostitution,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor your daughters-in-law for adultery.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Your men visit prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
sacrifice with cult prostitutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
So a people without understanding come to ruin!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Though you commit adultery, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
let not Judah become guilty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Do not go to Gilgal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
do not go up to Beth-aven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor swear an oath, \uc1\u8220*As the {\scaps Lord} lives.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Like a willful heifer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Israel is stubborn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Can the {\scaps Lord} now feed them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as he would a lamb in a broad pasture?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17} Ephraim is wedded to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Leave them alone!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When their drinking is over
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they sleep with the cult prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their rulers love shameful ways.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19} A windstorm will wrap them in its wings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will be ashamed of their sacrifices{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   LXX: altars. }.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The guilt of priests and princes

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Hear this, priests!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Attend, Israelites!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Listen, royal family!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For you is the judgment:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a snare you have become at Mizpeh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and a net spread out on Tabor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the rebels are deep in slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but I will discipline all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3} I know Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Israel is not hidden from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for you, Ephraim, have committed prostitution
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Israel is defiled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Their deeds do not permit them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to return to their God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For the spirit of prostitution is within them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they do not know the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Israel\uc1\u8217*s arrogance testifies against them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Israel, even Ephraim, stumble in their sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Judah also stumbles with them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}With their sheep and their cattle
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will go to seek the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but they will not find him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he has withdrawn from them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for they have been untrue to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their children are strangers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Their new moon festivals will soon destroy them and their fields.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Blow the trumpet in Gibeah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the clarion in Ramah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Raise the alarm in Beth-aven:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
we are with you, Benjamin!{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   LXX: make Benjamin tremble }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Ephraim will become a desolation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in the day of punishment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
concerning the tribes of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I make known what is certain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The princes of Israel have become
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like thieves who move boundary stones.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
On them I will pour out my wrath like a flood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim will be oppressed, crushed by judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for they are determined to go after vanity{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   So LXX. Heb. uncertain.  }.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So I am like a moth to Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like rottenness to the house of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For when Ephraim saw their sickness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Israel their wound,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ephraim turned to Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to its patron king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But he cannot heal you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor relieve you of your wound.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For I myself will be like a lion to Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a young lion to the house of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I, yes I, will rend and go my way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will carry off and none will rescue.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The lack of repentance and reform

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will return to my place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
until in remorse they seek my presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When they are in distress they will quickly seek me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}saying, \uc1\u8220*Come let us return to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for he has torn us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but he will heal us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he has injured us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but he will bandage our wounds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}he will revive in a couple of days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
on the third day he will raise us up again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to live in his presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let us know, let us eagerly seek to know the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His coming is as sure as the sunrise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He will come to us like the winter rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as the spring rain that waters the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}What can I make of you, Ephraim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
What can I make of you, Judah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Your love is like a morning cloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like the dew which early goes away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}That is why I have hewn them by the prophets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I have slain them by the words of my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My judgment is like the light that goes forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for it is love that I delight in and not sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and knowledge of God and not burnt offerings.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But they after the manner of men have transgressed the covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
there they have played me false.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Gilead is a city of evildoers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
tracked with bloody footprints,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and as bandits lie in wait for a man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so a band of priests murder on the way to Shechem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How terrible is the evil they do!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In Bethel I have seen a horrible thing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There Ephraim plays the prostitute,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Israel is defiled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Judah for you also a harvest is set.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When I would restore the fortunes of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}when I would heal Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
then Ephrain\uc1\u8217*s guilt is revealed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Samaria\uc1\u8217*s crimes are seen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
how they practise fraud
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the thief enters in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
while outside bandits plunder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But it never crosses their minds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
that I remember their wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Now their misdeeds surround them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they are always before my face.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Their wickedness amuses the king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their lying gladdens the princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}since they are all of them adulterers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Their desire to do evil
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
burns like an oven heated by the baker,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so hot that he need not stir the fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from the kneading of the dough, until it rises.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On our king\uc1\u8217*s festival day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the princes are flushed with fever from wine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He stretched forth his hand with the contemptuous{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for like an oven their heart burns with treachery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
all night their anger smolders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in the morning it blazes into a flame of fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All of them glow like an oven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they devour their rulers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
All their kings have fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There is none among them who calls to me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Evidence of the nation\uc1\u8217*s iniquity

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* he lets himself be mixed among the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ephraim \uc1\u8211* he has become a cake unturned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Strangers have devoured his strength, but he does not know it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His hair is sprinkled with grey, but he does not notice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Israel\uc1\u8217*s arrogance testifies against them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
yet they do not return to the {\scaps Lord} their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and in all this they do not seek him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim is like a simple, silly dove:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to Egypt they call, after Assyria they go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}wherever they turn I will spread my net over them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like birds of the sky I will bring them down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will catch them when I hear them gathering.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Woe to them, for they have strayed from me!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Destruction to them, for they have been untrue to me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Although it was I who redeemed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they speak lies about me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They have never cried to me with their hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but they are always wailing on their beds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They gather to beg for corn and new wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but they turn away from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Although it was I who trained and strengthened their arms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
concerning me they plan only evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They turn away from the Most High{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They have become like a bow that swerves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Their princes will fall by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because of the insolence of their tongues.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The land of Egypt will mock them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Put the horn to your mouth!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
An eagle swoops down upon the house of the {\scaps Lord}{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because they have transgressed my covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
trespassed against my law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}To me they continually cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*My God, we Israel, we know you!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Israel has spurned that which is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so let the foe pursue him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s rejection of Israel\uc1\u8217*s rulers and idols

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They themselves have made kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but without my consent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They have made princes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but without my knowledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Out of their silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they have made idols to their destruction!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Your calf idol, O Samaria, is distasteful.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My anger is kindled against them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How long will they escape punishment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Israel made the thing:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a workman made it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It is not a god!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Samaria\uc1\u8217*s calf will become mere splinters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They sow the wind and will reap the whirlwind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A shoot which has no stalk, yields no fruit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
If it should yield, strangers would devour it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Israel is devoured.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Already it lies discarded among the nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a worthless pot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For by themselves they have gone up to Assyria
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a wild donkey which wanders by itself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ephraim pays for love
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but even if they sell themselves among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will round them up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Soon the kings and princes will writhe under the burden of tribute!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For as many altars as Ephraim has erected,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they are to him altars for sinning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}were I to write for him ever so many instructions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they would be regarded as from a stranger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The people love sacrifice, and so they offer sacrifices,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
meat, and so they eat it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
although the {\scaps Lord} is not pleased with them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so now he will remember their guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and punish their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Back to Egypt with them!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For Israel forgot his Maker and built palaces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Judah multiplied fortified cities.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But I will send fire upon her cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and it will devour her strongholds.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The horrors of the coming exile

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Rejoice not too loudly, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for you have commited adultery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
being untrue to your God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
You have loved a prostitute\uc1\u8217*s wages
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
on every threshing floor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Threshing floor and wine vat won\uc1\u8217*t feed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the new wine will fail them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They will not stay in the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but Ephraim will return to Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and in Assyria they will eat what is unclean.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They will not pour out libations of wine to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor please him with their sacrifices.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Their bread will be like the bread of mourners:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
all who eat it will defile themselves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For their bread will be only for their hunger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
it will not come into the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s temple.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}What will you do on the day of the festival?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Or on the day of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s feast?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Even if they flee from destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Egypt will gather them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Memphis will bury them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Nettles will take possession of their treasure of silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
thorns will push into their tents.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The days of punishment are come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the days of recompense are at hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as soon the Israelites will know!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The prophet is a fool,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the inspired man is raving mad!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It is because of the greatness of your iniquity
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the greatness of your hatred.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim acts the spy with my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a prophet finds the snares of a fowler are in all his ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In the house of his God they lay hostile plots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}they commit crimes as in the days of Gibeah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God will remember their iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He will punish their sin.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s corruption

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I found Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like finding grapes in the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I saw your ancestors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like they were the first fruit on a fig tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but as soon as they came to Baal-peor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they consecrated themselves to shamefulness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and became as abominable as the object of their love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* like a bird his glory flies away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There will be no more birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
no more motherhood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
no more conception.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Even though they bring up their children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will bereave them until not one is left.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Woe to them when I turn away from them!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* planted like Tyre in a meadow{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. LXX: as I have seen, his sons are destined to be a prey },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But Ephraim too must lead forth their children to slaughter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Give them, {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211* what will you give?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Give them a miscarrying womb and shrivelled up breasts!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All their evil began in Gilgal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
there I learned to hate them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Because of the evil of their deeds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will drive them out of my house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will no longer love them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for all their princes are rebels.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Ephraim is blighted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their root withered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
If they do bear children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will slay the darlings of their womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My God will reject them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because they have not listened to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will become wanderers among the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}A luxuriant vine is Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He bore fruit lavishly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In proportion to the increase of his fruit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he increased altars to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In proportion to the beauty of his land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he made beautiful the sacred pillars.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Their heart is false,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
now they must be punished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God himself will break the necks of their altars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he will destroy their sacred pillars.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yes, soon they will be saying,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*We have no king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for we have not revered the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and a king, what could he do for us anyway?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Speaking words, perjuring themselves, making agreements,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and litigation springs up like a poisonous weed in a plowed field.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The inhabitants of Samaria will tremble with fear
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for their calf of Beth-aven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Its people will mourn over it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and so will its priests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who had rejoiced for its glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
now departed from it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It will be carried off to Assyria
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as a present to the patron king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Disgrace will Ephraim bear
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Israel will be ashamed of its idol.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As for Samaria, her king will disappear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like foam on the face of the waters.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And the high places of Aven will be destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the shrines of Israel\uc1\u8217*s sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
thorns and thistles will grow on their altars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and they will say to the mountains, \uc1\u8220*Cover us,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and to the hills, \uc1\u8220*Fall upon us.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 What a nation sows, it will reap

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}From the time of Gibeah, Israel has sinned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
There they took their stand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Will not war overtake them in Gibeah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because of the wicked?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When I please, I will punish them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Nations will gather against them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to chain them for their double crimes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim indeed was a trained heifer that loved to thresh grain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I myself laid a yoke upon his fair neck{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I made Ephraim draw and Judah must plow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Jacob must turn the soil for himself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Sow for yourselves righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
reap the fruits of love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Break up your fallow ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for it is time to seek the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so righteousness may come to you{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But you have plowed wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
iniquity have you reaped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
You have eaten the fruit of lies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Because you have trusted in your own path{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   LXX: chariots },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in the multitude of your warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}the alarm of war will sound in your cities
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and all your fortresses will be ruined,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as Shalman laid in ruins Beth-arbel in the day of battle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
when mothers were dashed to pieces over their children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Thus will I do to you, Bethel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
because of the enormity of your wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When dawn breaks, so will the king of Israel be broken.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s love for his faithless people

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}When Israel was young, then I began to love him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and out of Egypt I called my son.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The more I called them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the further they went away from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They kept sacrificing to Baals
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and making offerings to idols.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yet it was I who taught Ephraim to walk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
taking them up in my arms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but they did not know that I healed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}With humane cords I ever drew them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
with bands of love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I was to them as one who lifts up the yoke from off their jaws,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and bending toward them, I gave them food to eat.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}No! They return to the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Assyria will be their king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for they have refused to return to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Therefore the swords will whirl in their cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
will devour in their fortresses{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For my people are bent in rebellion against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
even if they call on the Most High he will not raise them{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}How can I give you up, Ephraim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Give you over, Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How am I to give you up as Admah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Make you like Zeboim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My heart asserts itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
my sympathies are all aglow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will not carry into effect the fierceness of my anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will not turn to destroy Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for God am I, and not man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
holy in the midst of you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
therefore I will not consume.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They will follow after the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Like a lion he will roar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and when he roars
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his children will come trembling from the west.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They will come trembling like the birds from Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like doves from the land of Assyria.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I will bring them back to their houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8211* declares the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s faithlessness from the first

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Ephraim has encompassed me with falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the house of Israel with deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But Judah still wanders with God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
faithful to the Holy One{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. Or "Judah is still restless against God" }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Ephraim herds the wind and hunts the sirocco.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
All day long they heap up falsehood and fraud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
make a treaty with Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and sends tribute of olive oil to Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} has a charge to bring against Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
to punish Jacob for his acts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
according to his deeds will he requite him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the womb he supplanted his brother,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in manhood he wrestled with God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He wrestled with the angel and prevailed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he wept and sought his blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
At Bethel the {\scaps Lord} found him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and there he spoke with us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the {\scaps Lord} is the God of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} is his name!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So now, by the help of your God, return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Keep true love and justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Trust in your God without ceasing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A merchant uses false scales:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They love to defraud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim says, \uc1\u8220*Yes, I have become rich,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I have secured wealth for myself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But despite my gains
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
no one will find a crime I can be convicted of!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I am the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
ever since the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will make you again dwell in tents,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
as in days of old.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I spoke continually by the prophets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It was I who multiplied visions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and spoke in parables through the prophets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In Gilead is iniquity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will come to nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In Gilgal they sacrifice bulls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
so their altars will be as stone heaps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
among the furrows of the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And Jacob fled to the territory of Aram,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and Israel worked to earn a wife:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for a wife he herded sheep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} brought Israel up from Egypt by a prophet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and by a prophet Israel was guarded.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Ephraim has given bitter provocation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His Lord will leave upon him his guilt of bloodshed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and for his contempt he will repay him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s final destruction of the guilty nation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}When Ephraim used to speak there was trembling;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a prince was he in Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But he incurred guilt through Baal and died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And now they go on sinning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They make for themselves molten gods \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
idols of silver, skillfully made,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
wholly the work of smiths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yet to such they sacrifice!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And they who sacrifice kiss calf idols{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore they shall be like the morning mist,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like the dew that early disappears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like the chaff which blows away from the threshing floor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like the smoke from the window.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet it was I, the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
ever since the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
you know no other god but me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor has there been any savior except me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It was I who shepherded you in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
in the land of burning heat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When they were pastured
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they became full,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
when they were full
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their hearts became proud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Therefore they forgot me!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So now I will be to them like a lion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a leopard will I lay in wait by the path.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will fall upon them like a bear robbed of her cubs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will tear open their chests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
like a lion will devour them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and like a wild beast will tear them in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You are destroyed, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
by me, your only helper.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I want to rule you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Where are your princes in your cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
those of whom you demanded,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Give me kings and princes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I give you kings in my anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and take them away in my wrath.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Ephrahn\uc1\u8217*s iniquity is gathered up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his sin is laid by in store.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The pangs of childbirth come upon him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but he is an unwise child.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For this is no time to refuse to leave the womb!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Should I deliver them from the power of Sheol?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Should I redeem them from death?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Death, where are your plagues?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Sheol, where is your pestilence?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Compassion is forever hidden from my eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Though he is flourishing among his brothers{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Or: in the midst of the reeds },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
there will come an east wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
coming up from the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
His fountain will dry up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his spring shall be parched.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The wind will strip the treasury,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
all the precious things.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Samaria will bear her guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for she has rebelled against her God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They will fall by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their children dashed to pieces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
their pregnant women ripped open.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Words of exhortation and promise

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Return, Israel, to the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for you have stumbled in your iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Take words of repentance with you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and return to the {\scaps Lord} your God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Say to him:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Wholly pardon our iniquity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
accept that which is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
instead of sacrificing bulls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
we offer our praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Assyria will not save us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
nor Egyptian warhorses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and we will no more call
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the work of our hands our gods.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For in you orphan Israel finds mercy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*I will heal their apostasy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will love them freely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
now that my anger is turned away from them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I will be as dew to Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He will blossom like the lily,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he will plant his roots like the cedars of Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}his saplings will spread out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his beauty will be like that of the olive tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
his fragrance like the cedars of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}People will return and dwell in my shade,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
they will bring life to new grain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They shall sprout like the vine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their renown will be like that of the wine of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* what have I to do with idols!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It is I the {\scaps Lord} who respond to him and look after him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I am like an evergreen cypress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
from me is your fruit found.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Whoever is wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
let him discern these things,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
prudent, let him perceive them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s ways are straight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and the righteous walk in them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
but the wicked stumble in them.
\par}

}