{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Romans (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Romans

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, who has been called to become an apostle, and has been set apart to tell God\uc1\u8217*s good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This good news God promised long ago through his prophets in the sacred scriptures,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}concerning his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord; who, as to his human nature, was descended from David,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}but, as to the spirit of holiness within him, was miraculously designated Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Through him we received the gift of the apostolic office, to win submission to the faith among all nations for the glory of his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And among these nations are you \uc1\u8211* you who have been called to belong to Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To all in Rome who are dear to God and have been called to become Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because the report of your faith is spreading throughout the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God, to whom I offer the worship of my soul as I tell the goodness of his Son, is my witness how constantly I mention you when I pray,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}asking that, if he be willing, I may some day at last find the way open to visit you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For I long to see you, in order to impart to you some spiritual gift and so give you fresh strength \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}or rather that both you and I may find encouragement in each other\uc1\u8217*s faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I want you to know, my friends, that I have many times intended coming to see you \uc1\u8211* but until now I have been prevented \uc1\u8211* that I might find among you some fruit of my labors, as I have already among the other nations.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Faith the Ground of Acceptance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I have a duty to both the Greek and the barbarian, to both the cultured and the ignorant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And so, for my part, I am ready to tell the good news to you also who are in Rome.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is the power of God which brings salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first, but also to the Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For in it there is a revelation of the divine righteousness resulting from faith and leading on to faith; as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Through faith the righteous will find life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So, too, there is a revelation from heaven of the divine wrath against every form of ungodliness and wickedness on the part of those people who, by their wicked lives, are stifling the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This is so, because what can be known about God is plain to them; for God himself has made it plain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For ever since the creation of the universe God\uc1\u8217*s invisible attributes \uc1\u8211* his everlasting power and divinity \uc1\u8211* are to be seen and studied in his works, so that people have no excuse;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}because, although they learned to know God, yet they did not offer him as God either praise or thanksgiving. Their speculations about him proved futile, and their undiscerning minds were darkened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Professing to be wise, they showed themselves fools;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and they transformed the glory of the immortal God into the likeness of mortal humans, and of birds, and beasts, and reptiles.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Therefore God abandoned them to impurity, letting them follow the cravings of their hearts, until they dishonored their own bodies;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}for they had substituted a lie for the truth about God, and had reverenced and worshiped created things more than the Creator, who is to be praised for ever. Amen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}That, I say, is why God abandoned them to degrading passions. Even the women among them perverted the natural use of their bodies to the unnatural;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}while the men, disregarding that for which women were intended by nature, were consumed with passion for one another. Men indulged in vile practices with men, and incurred in their own persons the inevitable penalty for their perverseness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then, as they would not keep God before their minds, God abandoned them to depraved thoughts, so that they did all kinds of shameful things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}They reveled in every form of wickedness, evil, greed, vice. Their lives were full of envy, murder, quarreling, treachery, malice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}They became back-biters, slanderers, impious, insolent, boastful. They devised new sins. They disobeyed their parents.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}They were undiscerning, untrustworthy, without natural affection or pity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Well aware of God\uc1\u8217*s decree, that those who do such things deserve to die, not only are they guilty of them themselves, but they even applaud those who do them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Therefore you have nothing to say in your own defense, whoever you are who set yourself up as a judge. In judging others you condemn yourself, for you who set yourself up as a judge do the very same things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And we know that God\uc1\u8217*s judgment falls unerringly on those who do them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You who judge those that do such things and yet are yourself guilty of them \uc1\u8211* do you suppose that you of all people will escape God\uc1\u8217*s judgment?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Or do you think lightly of his abundant kindness, patience, and forbearance, not realizing that his kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Hard-hearted and impenitent as you are, you are storing up for yourself wrath on the day of wrath, when God\uc1\u8217*s justice as a judge will be revealed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for he will give to everyone what their actions deserve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To those who, by perseverance in doing good, aim at glory, honor, and all that is imperishable, he will give immortal life;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}while as to those who are factious, and disobedient to truth but obedient to evil, wrath and anger, distress and despair,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}will fall on every human being who persists in wrongdoing \uc1\u8211* on the Jew first, but also on the Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But there will be glory, honor, and peace for everyone who does right \uc1\u8211* for the Jew first, but also for the Greek,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}since God shows no partiality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}All who, when they sin, are without Law will also perish without Law; while all who, when they sin, are under Law, will be judged as being under Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It is not those who hear the words of a Law that are righteous before God, but it is those who obey it that will be pronounced righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Gentiles, who have no Law, do instinctively what the Law requires, they, though they have no Law, are a Law to themselves;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for they show the demands of the Law written on their hearts; their consciences corroborating it, while in their thoughts they argue either in self-accusation or, it may be, in self-defense \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}on the day when God passes judgment on people\uc1\u8217*s inmost lives, as the good news that I tell declares that he will do through Christ Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, perhaps, you bear the name of \uc1\u8216*Jew,\uc1\u8217* and are relying on Law, and boast of belonging to God, and understand his will,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and, having been carefully instructed from the Law, have learned to appreciate the finer moral distinctions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Perhaps you are confident that you are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in the dark, an instructor of the unintelligent,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and a teacher of the childish, because in the Law you possess the outline of all knowledge and truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Why, then, you teacher of others, don\uc1\u8217*t you teach yourself? Do you preach against stealing, and yet steal?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Do you forbid adultery, and yet commit adultery? Do you loathe idols, and yet plunder temples?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Boasting, as you do, of your Law, do you dishonor God by breaking the Law?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For, as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The Gentiles insult God\uc1\u8217*s name because of you\uc1\u8217*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Circumcision has its value, if you are obeying the Law. But, if you are a breaker of the Law, your circumcision is no better than uncircumcision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}If, then, an uncircumcised man pays regard to the requirements of the Law, won\uc1\u8217*t he, although not circumcised, be regarded by God as if he were?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Indeed, the person who, owing to his birth, remains uncircumcised, and yet scrupulously obeys the Law, will condemn you, who, for all your written Law and your circumcision, are yet a breaker of the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For a man who is only a Jew outwardly is not a real Jew; nor is outward bodily circumcision real circumcision. The real Jew is the person who is a Jew in soul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and the real circumcision is the circumcision of the heart, a spiritual and not a literal thing. Such a person wins praise from God, though not from people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}What is the advantage, then, of being a Jew? Or what is the good of circumcision?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Great in every way. First of all, because the Jews were entrusted with God\uc1\u8217*s utterances.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What follows then? Some, no doubt, showed a want of faith; but will their want of faith make God break faith? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}God must prove true, though everyone prove a liar! As scripture says of God \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*That you may be pronounced righteous in what you say, and gain your cause when people would judge you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But what if our wrongdoing makes God\uc1\u8217*s righteousness all the clearer? Will God be wrong in inflicting punishment? (I can but speak as a person.) Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Otherwise how can God judge the world?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But, if my falsehood redounds to the glory of God, by making his truthfulness more apparent, why am I like others, still condemned as a sinner?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Why should we not say \uc1\u8211* as some people slanderously assert that we do say \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Let us do evil that good may come\uc1\u8217*? The condemnation of such people is indeed just!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What follows, then? Are we Jews in any way superior to others? Not at all. Our indictment against both Jews and Greeks was that all alike were in subjection to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}As scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*There is not even one who is righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}not one who understands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
not one who is searching for God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They have all gone astray;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
they have one and all become depraved;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
there is no one who is doing good \uc1\u8211* no, not one!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Their throats are like opened graves;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
they deceive with their tongues.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*The venom of snakes lies behind their lips,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*And their mouths are full of bitter curses.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Swift are their feet to shed blood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Distress and trouble dog their steps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and the path of peace they do not know.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*The fear of God is not before their eyes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Now we know that everything said in the Law is addressed to those who are under its authority, in order that every mouth may be closed, and to bring the whole world under God\uc1\u8217*s judgment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For no human being will be pronounced righteous before God as the result of obedience to Law; for it is Law that shows what sin is.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But now, quite apart from Law, the divine righteousness stands revealed, and to it the Law and the prophets bear witness \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}the divine righteousness which is bestowed, through faith in Jesus Christ, on all, without distinction, who believe in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For all have sinned, and all fall short of God\uc1\u8217*s glorious ideal,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but, in his loving kindness, are being freely pronounced righteous through the deliverance found in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For God set him before the world, to be, by the shedding of his blood, a means of reconciliation through faith. And this God did to prove his righteousness, and because, in his forbearance, he had passed over the sins that people had previously committed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}as a proof, I repeat, at the present time, of his own righteousness, that he might be righteous in our eyes, and might pronounce righteous the person who takes their stand on faith in Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}What, then, becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. By what sort of Law? A Law requiring obedience? No, a Law requiring faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For we conclude that a person is pronounced righteous on the ground of faith, quite apart from obedience to Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Or can it be that God is the God only of the Jews? Isn\uc1\u8217*t he also the God of the Gentiles?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Yes, of the Gentiles also, since there is only one God, and he will pronounce those who are circumcised righteous as the result of faith, and also those who are uncircumcised on their showing the same faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Do we, then, use this faith to abolish Law? Heaven forbid! No, we establish Law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}What then, it may be asked, are we to say about Abraham, the ancestor of our nation?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If he was pronounced righteous as the result of obedience, then he has something to boast of. Yes, but not before God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For what are the words of scripture? \uc1\u8216*Abraham had faith in God, and his faith was regarded by God as righteousness.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now wages are regarded as due to the person who works, not as a favor, but as a debt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}while, as for the person who does not rely on their obedience, but has faith in him who can pronounce the godless righteous, their faith is regarded by God as righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In precisely the same way David speaks of the blessing pronounced on the person who is regarded by God as righteous apart from actions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Blessed are those whose wrongdoings have been forgiven and over whose sins a veil has been drawn!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Blessed the man whom the Lord will never regard as sinful!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Is this blessing, then, pronounced on the circumcised only or on the uncircumcised as well? We say that \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Abraham\uc1\u8217*s faith was regarded by God as righteousness.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Under what circumstances, then, did this take place? After his circumcision or before it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Not after, but before. And it was as a sign of this that he received the rite of circumcision \uc1\u8211* to show the righteousness due to the faith of an uncircumcised man \uc1\u8211* in order that he might be the father of all who have faith in God even when uncircumcised, so that they also may be regarded by God as righteous;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}as well as father of the circumcised \uc1\u8211* to those who are not only circumcised, but who also follow our father Abraham in that faith which he had while still uncircumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For the promise that he should inherit the world did not come to Abraham or his descendants through Law, but through the righteousness due to faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If those who take their stand on Law are to inherit the world, then faith is robbed of its meaning and the promise comes to nothing!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Law entails punishment; but, where no Law exists, no breach of it is possible.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}That is why everything is made to depend on faith: so that everything may be God\uc1\u8217*s gift, and in order that the fulfillment of the promise may be made certain for all Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants \uc1\u8211* not only for those who take their stand on the Law, but also for those who take their stand on the faith of Abraham. (He is the father of us all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I have made you the father of many nations.\uc1\u8217*) And this they do in the sight of that God in whom Abraham had faith, and who gives life to the dead, and speaks of what does not yet exist as if it did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}With no ground for hope, Abraham, sustained by hope, put faith in God; in order that, in fulfillment of the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*So many will your descendants be,\uc1\u8217* he might become \uc1\u8216*the father of many nations.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Though he was nearly a hundred years old, yet his faith did not fail him, even when he thought of his own body, then utterly worn out, and remembered that Sarah was past bearing children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He was not led by want of faith to doubt God\uc1\u8217*s promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On the contrary, his faith gave him strength; and he praised God, in the firm conviction that what God has promised he is also able to carry out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And therefore his faith \uc1\u8216*was regarded as righteousness.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now these words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*it was regarded as righteousness\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* were not written with reference to Abraham only;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but also with reference to us. Our faith, too, will be regarded by God in the same light, if we have faith in him who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}for Jesus was given up to death to atone for our offenses, and was raised to life that we might be pronounced righteous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Therefore, having been pronounced righteous as the result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It is through him that, by reason of our faith, we have obtained admission to that place in God\uc1\u8217*s favor in which we now stand. So let us exult in our hope of attaining God\uc1\u8217*s glorious ideal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And not only that, but let us also exult in our troubles;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for we know that trouble develops endurance, and endurance strength of character, and strength of character hope,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and that hope never disappoints. For the love of God has filled our hearts through the Holy Spirit which was given us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}seeing that, while we were still powerless, Christ, in God\uc1\u8217*s good time, died on behalf of the godless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Even for an upright person scarcely anyone will die. For a really good person perhaps someone might even dare to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But God puts his love for us beyond all doubt by the fact that Christ died on our behalf while we were still sinners.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Much more, then, now that we have been pronounced righteous by virtue of the shedding of his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For if, when we were God\uc1\u8217*s enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, much more, now that we have become reconciled, will we be saved by virtue of Christ\uc1\u8217*s life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And not only that, but we exult in God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, through whom we have now obtained this reconciliation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and through sin came death; so, also, death spread to all humanity, because every person has sinned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Even before the time of the Law there was sin in the world; but sin cannot be charged against someone where no Law exists.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet, from Adam to Moses, death reigned even over those whose sin was not a breach of a law, as Adam\uc1\u8217*s was. And Adam foreshadows the one to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But there is a contrast between Adam\uc1\u8217*s offense and God\uc1\u8217*s gracious gift. For, if by reason of the offense of the one man the whole human race died, far more were the loving kindness of God, and the gift given in the loving kindness of the one man, Jesus Christ, lavished on the whole human race.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}There is a contrast, too, between the gift and the results of the one man\uc1\u8217*s sin. The judgment, which followed on the one man\uc1\u8217*s sin, resulted in condemnation, but God\uc1\u8217*s gracious gift, which followed on many offenses, resulted in a decree of righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For if, by reason of the offense of the one man, death reigned through that one man, far more will those, on whom God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness and his gift of righteousness are lavished, find life, and reign through the one man, Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Briefly then, just as a single offense resulted for all humanity in condemnation, so, too, a single decree of righteousness resulted for all humanity in that declaration of righteousness which brings life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For, as through the disobedience of the one man the whole human race was rendered sinful, so, too, through the obedience of the one, the whole human race will be rendered righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Law was introduced in order that offenses might be multiplied. But, where sins were multiplied, the loving kindness of God was lavished the more,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}in order that, just as sin had reigned in the realm of death, so, too, might loving-kindness reign through righteousness, and result in eternal life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Difficulties arising from this Teaching

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}What are we to say, then? Are we to continue to sin, in order that God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness may be multiplied?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Heaven forbid! We became dead to sin, so how can we go on living in it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Or can it be that you do not know that all of us, who were baptized into union with Christ Jesus, in our baptism shared his death?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Consequently, through sharing his death in our baptism, we were buried with him; so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by a manifestation of the Father\uc1\u8217*s power, so we also may live a new life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If we have become united with him by the act symbolic of his death, surely we will also become united with him by the act symbolic of his resurrection.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We recognize the truth that our old self was crucified with Christ, in order that the body, the stronghold of sin, might be rendered powerless, so that we should no longer be slaves to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the man who has so died has been pronounced righteous and released from sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And our belief is, that, as we have shared Christ\uc1\u8217*s death, we will also share his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We know, indeed, that Christ, having once risen from the dead, will not die again. Death has power over him no longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the death that he died was a death to sin, once and for all. But the life that he now lives, he lives for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So let it be with you \uc1\u8211* regard yourselves as dead to sin, but as living for God, through union with Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal bodies and compel you to obey its cravings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Do not offer any part of your bodies to sin, in the cause of unrighteousness, but once for all offer yourselves to God (as those who, though once dead, now have life), and devote every part of your bodies to the cause of righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For sin will not lord it over you. You are living under the reign, not of Law, but of love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}What follows, then? Are we to sin because we are living under the reign of love and not of Law? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Surely you know that when you offer yourselves as servants, to obey anyone, you are the servants of the person whom you obey, whether the service be a service to sin which leads to death, or a service to duty which leads to righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}God be thanked that, though you were once servants of sin, yet you learned to give hearty obedience to that form of doctrine under which you were placed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Set free from the control of sin, you became servants to righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I can but speak as people do because of the weakness of your earthly nature. Once you offered every part of your bodies to the service of impurity, and of wickedness, which leads to further wickedness. Now, in the same way, offer them to the service of righteousness, which leads to holiness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}While you were still servants of sin, you were free as regards righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But what were the fruits that you reaped from those things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of such things is death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But now that you have been set free from the control of sin, and have become servants to God, the fruit that you reap is an ever increasing holiness, and the end eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The wages of sin are death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through union with Christ Jesus, our Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Surely, friends, you know (for I am speaking to people who know what Law means) that Law has power over a person only as long as they lives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband while he is living; but, if her husband dies, she is set free from the law that bound her to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If, then, during her husband\uc1\u8217*s lifetime, she unites herself to another man, she will be called an adulteress; but, if her husband dies, the law has no further hold on her, nor, if she unites herself to another man, is she an adulteress.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And so with you, my friends; as far as the Law was concerned, you underwent death in the crucified body of the Christ, so that you might be united to another, to him who was raised from the dead, in order that our lives might bear fruit for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When we were living merely earthly lives, our sinful passions, aroused by the Law, were active in every part of our bodies, with the result that our lives bore fruit for death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But now we are set free from the Law, because we are dead to that which once kept us under restraint; and so we serve under new, spiritual conditions, and not under old, written regulations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}What are we to say, then? That Law and sin are the same thing? Heaven forbid! On the contrary, I should not have learned what sin is, had not it been for Law. If the Law did not say \uc1\u8216*You must not covet,\uc1\u8217* I should not know what it is to covet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But sin took advantage of the commandment to arouse in me every form of covetousness, for where there is no consciousness of Law sin shows no sign of life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There was a time when I myself, unconscious of Law, was alive; but when the commandment was brought home to me, sin sprang into life, while I died!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The commandment that should have meant life I found to result in death!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Sin took advantage of the commandment to deceive me, and used it to bring about my death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so the Law is holy, and each commandment is also holy, and just, and good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Did, then, a thing, which in itself was good, involve death in my case? Heaven forbid! It was sin that involved death; so that, by its use of what I regarded as good to bring about my death, its true nature might appear; and in this way the commandment showed how intensely sinful sin is.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am earthly \uc1\u8211* sold into slavery to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I do not understand my own actions. For I am so far from habitually doing what I want to do, that I find myself doing the thing that I hate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But when I do what I want not to do, I am admitting that the Law is right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This being so, the action is no longer my own, but is done by the sin which is within me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I know that there is nothing good in me \uc1\u8211* I mean in my earthly nature. For, although it is easy for me to want to do right, to act rightly is not easy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I fail to do the good thing that I want to do, but the bad thing that I want not to do \uc1\u8211* that I habitually do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But, when I do the thing that I want not to do, the action is no longer my own, but is done by the sin which is within me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}This, then, is the law that I find \uc1\u8211* when I want to do right, wrong presents itself!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}At heart I delight in the Law of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}but throughout my body I see a different law, one which is in conflict with the law accepted by my reason, and which endeavors to make me a prisoner to that law of sin which exists throughout my body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Miserable man that I am! Who will deliver me from the body that is bringing me to this death?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Thank God, there is deliverance through Jesus Christ, our Lord! Well then, for myself, with my reason I serve the Law of God, but with my earthly nature the Law of sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}There is, therefore, now no condemnation for those who are in union with Christ Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for through your union with Christ Jesus, the Law of the life-giving Spirit has set you free from the Law of sin and death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What Law could not do, in so far as our earthly nature weakened its action, God did, by sending his own Son, with a nature resembling our sinful nature, to atone for sin. He condemned sin in that earthly nature,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}so that the requirements of the Law might be satisfied in us who live now in obedience, not to our earthly nature, but to the Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They who follow their earthly nature are earthly-minded, while they who follow the Spirit are spiritually minded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}To be earthly-minded means death, to be spiritually minded means life and peace;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}because to be earthly-minded is to be an enemy to God, for such a mind does not submit to the Law of God, nor indeed can it do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They who are earthly cannot please God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You, however, are not earthly but spiritual, since the Spirit of God lives within you. Unless a person has the Spirit of Christ, they do not belong to Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but, if Christ is within you, then, though the body is dead as a consequence of sin, the spirit is life as a consequence of righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And, if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead lives within you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life even to your mortal bodies, through his Spirit living within you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So then, friends, we owe nothing to our earthly nature, that we should live in obedience to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If you live in obedience to your earthly nature, you will inevitably die; but if, by the power of the Spirit, you put an end to the evil habits of the body, you will live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}All who are guided by the Spirit of God are children of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For you did not receive the spirit of a slave, to fill you once more with fear, but the spirit of a child by adoption, which leads us to cry \uc1\u8216*Abba, our Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The Spirit himself unites with our spirits in bearing witness to our being God\uc1\u8217*s children,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and if children, then heirs \uc1\u8211* heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, since we share Christ\uc1\u8217*s sufferings in order that we may also share his glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I do not count the sufferings of our present life worthy of mention when compared with the glory that is to be revealed and bestowed on us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}All nature awaits with eager expectation the appearing of the sons of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For nature was made subject to imperfection \uc1\u8211* not by its own choice, but owing to him who made it so \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}yet not without the hope that some day nature, also, will be set free from enslavement to decay, and will attain to the freedom which will mark the glory of the children of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}We know, indeed, that all nature alike has been groaning in the pains of labor to this very hour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And not nature only; but we ourselves also, though we have already a first gift of the Spirit \uc1\u8211* we ourselves are inwardly groaning, while we eagerly await our full adoption as sons \uc1\u8211* the redemption of our bodies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}By our hope we were saved. But the thing hoped for is no longer an object of hope when it is before our eyes; for who hopes for what is before his eyes?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But when we hope for what is not before our eyes, then we wait for it with patience.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So, also, the Spirit supports us in our weakness. We do not even know how to pray as we should; but the Spirit himself pleads for us in sighs that can find no utterance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Yet he who searches all our hearts knows what the Spirit\uc1\u8217*s meaning is, because the pleadings of the Spirit for Christ\uc1\u8217*s people are in accordance with his will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But we do know that God causes all things to work together for the good of those who love him \uc1\u8211* those who have received the call in accordance with his purpose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For those whom God chose from the first he also destined from the first to be transformed into likeness to his Son, so that his Son might be the eldest among many brothers and sisters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And those whom God destined for this he also called; and those whom he called he also pronounced righteous; and those whom he pronounced righteous he also brought to glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}What are we to say, then, in the light of all this?
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
If God is on our side, who can there be against us?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}God did not withhold his own Son, but gave him up on behalf of us all; will he not, then, with him, freely give us all things?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Who will bring a charge against any of God\uc1\u8217*s people? He who pronounces them righteous is God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Who is there to condemn them? He who died for us is Christ Jesus! \uc1\u8211* or, rather, it was he who was raised from the dead, and who is now at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand and is even pleading on our behalf!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Who is there to separate us from the love of the Christ? Will trouble, or difficulty, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or the sword?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*For your sake we are being killed all the day long, We are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Yet amid all these things we more than conquer through him who loved us!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor archangels, nor the present, nor the future, nor any powers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God revealed in Christ Jesus, our Lord!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Gentiles and Jews

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}I am speaking the truth as one in union with Christ; it is no lie; and my conscience, enlightened by the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}bears me out when I say that there is a great weight of sorrow on me and that my heart is never free from pain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I could wish that I were myself accursed and severed from the Christ, for the sake of my people \uc1\u8211* my own flesh and blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For they are Israelites, and theirs are the adoption as children, the visible presence, the covenants, the revealed Law, the Temple worship, and the promises.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They are descended from the patriarchs, and, as far as his human nature was concerned, from them came the Christ \uc1\u8211* he who is supreme over all things, God for ever blessed. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Not that God\uc1\u8217*s Word has failed. For it is not all who are descended from Israel who are true Israelites;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}nor, because they are Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants, are they all his children; but \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*It is Isaac\uc1\u8217*s children who will be called your descendants.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This means that it is not the children born in the course of nature who are God\uc1\u8217*s children, but it is the children born in fulfillment of the promise who are to be regarded as Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For these words are the words of a promise \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*About this time I will come, and Sarah will have a son.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nor is that all. There is also the case of Rebecca, when she was about to bear children to our ancestor Isaac.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For in order that the purpose of God, working through selection, might not fail \uc1\u8211* a selection depending, not on obedience, but on his call \uc1\u8211* Rebecca was told, before her children were born and before they had done anything either right or wrong,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}that the elder would be a servant to the younger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The words of scripture are \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I loved Jacob, but I hated Esau.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}What are we to say, then? Is God guilty of injustice? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For his words to Moses are \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I will take pity on whom I take pity, and be merciful to whom I am merciful.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So, then, all depends, not on human wishes or human efforts, but on God\uc1\u8217*s mercy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In scripture, again, it is said to Pharaoh \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*It was for this purpose that I raised you to the throne, to show my power by my dealings with you, and to make my name known throughout the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So, then, where God wills, he takes pity, and where he wills, he hardens the heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Perhaps you will say to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*How can anyone still be blamed? For who withstands his purpose?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I might rather ask \uc1\u8216*Who are you who are arguing with God?\uc1\u8217* Does a thing which a person has moulded say to the person who has moulded it \uc1\u8216*Why did you make me like this?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Has not the potter absolute power over their clay, so that out of the same lump they make one thing for better, and another for common, use?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And what if God, intending to reveal his displeasure and make his power known, bore most patiently with the objects of his displeasure, though they were fit only to be destroyed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}so as to make known his surpassing glory in dealing with the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared beforehand for glory,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and whom he called \uc1\u8211* even us \uc1\u8211* not only from among the Jews but from among the Gentiles also!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}This, indeed, is what he says in the book of Hosea \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Those who were not my people, I will call my people, and those who were unloved I will love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And in the place where it was said to them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You are not my people\uc1\u8221*, they will be called sons of the living God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And Isaiah cries aloud over Israel \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Though the sons of Israel are like the sand of the sea in number, only a remnant of them will escape!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For the Lord will execute his sentence on the world, fully and without delay.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It is as Isaiah foretold \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Had not the Lord of Hosts spared some few of our people to us, we should have become like Sodom and been made to resemble Gomorrah.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}What are we to say, then? Why, that Gentiles, who were not in search of righteousness, secured it \uc1\u8211* a righteousness which was the result of faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}while Israel, which was in search of a Law which would ensure righteousness, failed to discover one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And why? Because they looked to obedience, and not to faith, to secure it. They stumbled over the stumbling-block.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*See, I place a stumbling-block in Zion \uc1\u8211* a rock which will prove a hindrance; and he who believes in him will have no cause for shame.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}My friends, my heart\uc1\u8217*s desire and prayer to God for my people is for their salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I can testify that they are zealous for the honor of God; but they are not guided by true insight,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}for, in their ignorance of the divine righteousness, and in their eagerness to set up a righteousness of their own, they refused to accept with submission the divine righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For Christ has brought Law to an end, so that righteousness may be obtained by everyone who believes in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For Moses writes that, as for the righteousness which results from Law, those who practice it will find life through it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But the righteousness which results from faith finds expression in these words: \uc1\u8216*Do not say to yourself \uc1\u8220*Who will go up into heaven?\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* (which means to bring Christ down){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*or \uc1\u8220*Who will go down into the depths below?\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* (which means to bring Christ up from the dead).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}No, but what does it say? \uc1\u8216*The message is near you, on your lips and in your heart\uc1\u8217* (which means \uc1\u8216*The message of faith\uc1\u8217* which we proclaim).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For, if with your lips you acknowledge the truth of the message that JESUS IS LORD, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For with their hearts people believe and so attain to righteousness, while with their lips they make their profession of faith and so find salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}As the passage of scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*No one who believes in him will have any cause for shame.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For no distinction is made between the Jew and the Greek, for all have the same Lord, and he is bountiful to all who invoke him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For everyone who invokes the name of the Lord will be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But how, it may be asked, are they to invoke one in whom they have not learned to believe? And how are they to believe in one whose words they have not heard? And how are they to hear his words unless someone proclaims him?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And how is anyone to proclaim him unless they are sent as his messengers? As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Still, it may be said, everyone did not give heed to the good news. No, for Isaiah asks \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Lord, who has believed our teaching?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And so we gather, faith is a result of teaching, and the teaching comes in the message of Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But I ask \uc1\u8216*Is it possible that people have never heard?\uc1\u8217* No, indeed, for \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Their voices spread through all the earth, and their message to the ends of the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But again I ask \uc1\u8216*Did not the people of Israel understand?\uc1\u8217* First there is Moses, who says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I, the Lord, will stir you to rivalry with a nation which is no nation; against an undiscerning nation I will arouse your anger.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And Isaiah says boldly \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I was found by those who were not seeking me; I made myself known to those who were not inquiring of me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But of the people of Israel he says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*All day long I have stretched out my hands to a people who disobey and contradict.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}I ask, then, \uc1\u8216*Has God rejected his people?\uc1\u8217* Heaven forbid! For I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}God has not rejected his people, whom he chose from the first. Have you forgotten the words of scripture in the story of Elijah \uc1\u8211* how he appeals to God against Israel?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have pulled down your altars, and I only am left; and now they are eager to take my life.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But what was the divine response? \uc1\u8216*I have kept for myself seven thousand who have never bowed the knee to Baal.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And so in our own time, too, there is to be found a remnant of our nation selected by God in love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But if in love, then it is not as a result of obedience. Otherwise love would cease to be love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}What follows from this? Why, that Israel as a nation failed to secure what it was seeking, while those whom God selected did secure it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The rest grew callous; as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*God has given them a deadness of mind \uc1\u8211* eyes that are not to see and ears that are not to hear \uc1\u8211* and it is so to this very day.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}David, too, says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*May their feasts prove a snare and a trap to them \uc1\u8211* a hindrance and a retribution;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}may their eyes be darkened, so that they cannot see; and do you always make their backs to bend.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I ask then \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Was their stumbling to result in their fall?\uc1\u8217* Heaven forbid! On the contrary, through their falling away salvation has reached the Gentiles, to stir the rivalry of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And, if their falling away has enriched the world, and their failure has enriched the Gentiles, how much more will result from their full restoration!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I am speaking to you who were Gentiles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Being myself an apostle to the Gentiles, I exalt my office, in the hope that I may stir my countrymen to rivalry, and so save some of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For, if their being cast aside has meant the reconciliation of the world, what will their reception mean, but life from the dead?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If the first handful of dough is holy, so is the whole mass, and if the root is holy, so are the branches.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Some, however, of the branches were broken off, and you, who were only a wild olive, were grafted in among them, and came to share with them the root which is the source of the richness of the cultivated olive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yet do not exult over the other branches. But, if you do exult over them, remember that you do not support the root, but that the root supports you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But branches, you will say, were broken off, so that I might be grafted in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}True, it was because of their want of faith that they were broken off, and it is because of your faith that you are standing. Do not think too highly of yourself, but beware.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For, if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}See, then, both the goodness and the severity of God \uc1\u8211* his severity towards those who fell, and his goodness towards you, provided that you continue to confide in that goodness; otherwise you, also, will be cut off.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And they, too, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in; for God has it in his power to graft them in again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}If you were cut off from your natural stock \uc1\u8211* a wild olive \uc1\u8211* and were grafted, contrary to the course of nature, on a good olive, much more will they \uc1\u8211* the natural branches \uc1\u8211* be grafted back into their parent tree.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}My friends, so that you don\uc1\u8217*t think too highly of yourselves, I want you to recognize the truth, hitherto hidden, that the callousness which has come over Israel is only partial, and will continue only until the whole Gentile world has been gathered in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And then all Israel will be saved. As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*From Zion will come the Deliverer; he will banish ungodliness from Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And they will see the fulfillment of my covenant, when I have taken away their sins.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}From the standpoint of the good news, the Jews are God\uc1\u8217*s enemies for your sake; but from the standpoint of God\uc1\u8217*s selection, they are dear to him for the sake of the patriarchs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For God never regrets his gifts or his call.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Just as you at one time were disobedient to him, but have now found mercy in the day of their disobedience;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}so, too, they have now become disobedient in your day of mercy, in order that they also in their turn may now find mercy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For God has given all alike over to disobedience, that to all alike he may show mercy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Oh! The unfathomable wisdom and knowledge of God! How inscrutable are his judgments, how untraceable his ways! Yes \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}ho has ever comprehended the mind of the Lord? Who has ever become his counsellor?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Or who has first given to him, so that he may claim a reward?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For all things are from him, through him, and for him. And to him be all glory for ever and ever! Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Advice on Daily Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}I entreat you, then, friends, by the mercies of God, to offer your bodies as a living and holy sacrifice, acceptable to God, for this is your rational worship.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Do not conform to the fashion of this world; but be transformed by the complete change that has come over your minds, so that you may discern what God\uc1\u8217*s will is \uc1\u8211* all that is good, acceptable, and perfect.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In fulfillment of the charge with which I have been entrusted, I tell every one of you not to think more highly of themselves than they ought to think, but to think until they learn to think soberly \uc1\u8211* in accordance with the measure of faith that God has allotted to each.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For, just as in the human body there is a union of many parts, and each part has its own function,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}so we, by our union in Christ, many though we are, form but one body, and individually we are related one to another as its parts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Since our gifts differ in accordance with the particular charge entrusted to us, if our gift is to preach, let our preaching correspond to our faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}if it is to minister to others, let us devote ourselves to our ministry; the teacher to their teaching,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}the counselor to their counsel. Let the person who gives in charity do so with a generous heart; let the person who is in authority exercise due diligence; let the person who shows kindness do so in a cheerful spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let your love be sincere. Hate the wrong; cling to the right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In the love of the community of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, be affectionate to one another; in showing respect, set an example of deference to one another;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}never flagging in zeal; fervent in spirit; serving the Master;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}rejoicing in your hope; steadfast under persecution; persevering in prayer;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}relieving the wants of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people; devoted to hospitality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Bless your persecutors \uc1\u8211* bless and never curse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Rejoice with those who are rejoicing, and weep with those who are weeping.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Let the same spirit of sympathy animate you all, not a spirit of pride; enjoy the company of ordinary people. Do not think too highly of yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Never return injury for injury. Aim at doing what everyone will recognize as honorable.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If it is possible, as far as rests with you, live peaceably with everyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Never avenge yourselves, dear friends, but make way for the wrath of God; for scripture declares \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*\uc1\u8220*It is for me to avenge, I will requite,\uc1\u8221* says the Lord.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Rather \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*If your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him to drink. By doing this you will heap coals of fire on his head.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Never be conquered by evil, but conquer evil with good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Let everyone obey the supreme authorities. For no authority exists except by the will of God, and the existing authorities have been appointed by God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Therefore the one who sets themself against the authorities is resisting God\uc1\u8217*s appointment, and those who resist will bring a judgment on themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}A good action has nothing to fear from rulers; a bad action has. Do you want to have no reason to fear the authorities? Then do what is good, and you will win their praise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For they are God\uc1\u8217*s servants appointed for your good. But, if you do what is wrong, you may well be afraid; for the sword they carry is not without meaning! They are God\uc1\u8217*s servants to inflict his punishments on those who do wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You are bound, therefore, to obey, not only through fear of God\uc1\u8217*s punishments, but also as a matter of conscience.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}This, too, is the reason for your paying taxes; for the officials are God\uc1\u8217*s officers, devoting themselves to this special work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In all cases pay what is due from you \uc1\u8211* tribute where tribute is due, taxes where taxes are due, respect where respect is due, and honor where honor is due.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Owe nothing to anyone except love; for they who love their neighbor have satisfied the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The commandments, \uc1\u8216*You must not commit adultery, you must not kill, you must not steal, you must not covet,\uc1\u8217* and whatever other commandment there is, are all summed up in the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You must love your neighbor as you love yourself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Love never wrongs a neighbor. Therefore love fully satisfies the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This I say, because you know the crisis that we have reached, for the time has already come for you to rouse yourselves from sleep; our salvation is nearer now than when we accepted the faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The night is almost gone; the day is near. Therefore let us be done with the deeds of darkness, and arm ourselves with the weapons of light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Being in the light of day, let us live becomingly, not in revelry and drunkenness, not in lust and licentiousness, not in quarreling and jealousy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}No! Arm yourselves with the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and spend no thought on your earthly nature, to satisfy its cravings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}As for those whose faith is weak, always receive them as friends, but not for the purpose of passing judgment on their scruples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}One person\uc1\u8217*s faith permits them to eat food of all kinds, while another whose faith is weak eats only vegetable food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The person who eats meat must not despise the person who abstains from it; nor must the person who abstains from eating meat pass judgment on the one who eats it, for God himself has received them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Who are you, that you should pass judgment on the servant of another? Their standing or falling concerns their own master. And stand they will, for their Master can enable them to stand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Again, one person considers some days to be more sacred than others, while another considers all days to be alike. Everyone ought to be fully convinced in their own mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The person who observes a day, observes it to the Master\uc1\u8217*s honor. They, again, who eat meat eat it to the Master\uc1\u8217*s honor, for they give thanks to God; while the person who abstains from it abstains from it to the Master\uc1\u8217*s honor, and also gives thanks to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}There is not one of us whose life concerns ourselves alone, and not one of us whose death concerns ourself alone;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for, if we live, our life is for the Master, and, if we die, our death is for the Master. Whether, then, we live or die we belong to the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The purpose for which Christ died and came back to life was this \uc1\u8211* that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I would ask the one \uc1\u8216*Why do you judge other followers of the Lord?\uc1\u8217* And I would ask the other \uc1\u8216*Why do you despise them?\uc1\u8217* For we will all stand before the court of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*\uc1\u8220*As surely as I live,\uc1\u8221* says the Lord, \uc1\u8220*every knee will bend before me and every tongue will praise God.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So, then, each one of us will have to render account of himself to God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Let us, then, cease to judge one another. Rather let this be your resolve \uc1\u8211* never to place a stumbling-block or an obstacle in the way of a fellow follower of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Through my union with the Lord Jesus, I know and am persuaded that nothing is defiling in itself. A thing is \uc1\u8216*defiling\uc1\u8217* only to the person who holds it to be so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If, for the sake of what you eat, you wound your fellow follower\uc1\u8217*s feelings, your life has ceased to be ruled by love. Do not, by what you eat, ruin someone for whom Christ died!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Do not let what is right for you become a matter of reproach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For the kingdom of God does not consist of eating and drinking, but of righteousness and peace and gladness through the presence of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The person who serves the Christ in this way pleases God, and wins the approval of their fellows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore our efforts should be directed towards all that makes for peace and the mutual building up of character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Do not undo God\uc1\u8217*s work for the sake of what you eat. Though everything is \uc1\u8216*clean,\uc1\u8217* yet, if a person eats so as to put a stumbling-block in the way of others, they do wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The right course is to abstain from meat or wine or, indeed, anything that is a stumbling-block to your fellow follower of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As for yourself \uc1\u8211* keep this conviction of yours to yourself, as in the presence of God. Happy the person who never has to condemn themselves in regard to something they think right!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The person, however, who has misgivings stands condemned if they still eat, because their doing so is not the result of faith. And anything not done as the result of faith is a sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}We, the strong, ought to take on our own shoulders the weaknesses of those who are not strong, and not merely to please ourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let each of us please our neighbor for our neighbor\uc1\u8217*s good, to help in the building up of their character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Even the Christ did not please himself! On the contrary, as scripture says of him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The reproaches of those who were reproaching you fell upon me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Whatever was written in the scriptures in days gone by was written for our instruction, so that, through patient endurance, and through the encouragement drawn from the scriptures, we might hold fast to our hope.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And may God, the giver of this patience and this encouragement, grant you to be united in sympathy in Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}so that with one heart and one voice you may praise the God and Father of Jesus Christ, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore always receive one another as friends, just as the Christ himself received us, to the glory of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For I tell you that Christ, in vindication of God\uc1\u8217*s truthfulness, has become a minister of the covenant of circumcision, so that he may fulfill the promises made to our ancestors,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and that the Gentiles also may praise God for his mercy. As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Therefore will I make acknowledgment to you among the Gentiles and sing in honor of your name.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And again it says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Rejoice, you Gentiles, with God\uc1\u8217*s people.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And yet again \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and let all Peoples sing his praises.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Again, Isaiah says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*There will be a Scion of the house of Jesse, One who is to arise to rule the Gentiles; on him will the Gentiles rest their hopes.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}May God, who inspires our hope, grant you perfect happiness and peace in your faith, until you are filled with this hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am persuaded, my friends \uc1\u8211* yes, I Paul, with regard to you \uc1\u8211* that you are yourselves full of kindness, furnished with all Christian learning, and well able to give advice to one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But in parts of this letter I have expressed myself somewhat boldly \uc1\u8211* by way of refreshing your memories \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}because of the charge with which God has entrusted me, that I should be an assistant of Christ Jesus to go to the Gentiles \uc1\u8211* that I should act as a priest of God\uc1\u8217*s good news, so that the offering up of the Gentiles may be an acceptable sacrifice, consecrated by the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It is, then, through my union with Christ Jesus that I have a proud confidence in my work for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For I will not dare to speak of anything but what Christ has done through me to win the obedience of the Gentiles \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}by my words and actions, through the power displayed in signs and marvels, and through the power of the Holy Spirit. And so, starting from Jerusalem and going as far as Illyria, I have told in full the good news of the Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}yet always with the ambition to tell the good news where Christ\uc1\u8217*s name had not previously been heard, so as to avoid building on another\uc1\u8217*s foundations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*They to whom he had never been proclaimed will see; and they who have never heard will understand!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}That is why I have so often been prevented from coming to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But now there are no further openings for me in these parts, and I have for several years been longing to come to you whenever I may be going to Spain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For my hope is to visit you on my journey, and then to be sent on my way by you, after I have first partly satisfied myself by seeing something of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Just now, however, I am on my way to Jerusalem, to take help to Christ\uc1\u8217*s people there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For Macedonia and Greece have been glad to make a collection for the poor among Christ\uc1\u8217*s people at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Yes, they were glad to do so; and indeed it is a duty which they owe to them. For the Gentile converts who have shared their spiritual blessings are in duty bound to minister to them in the things of this world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When I have settled this matter, and have secured for the poor at Jerusalem the enjoyment of these benefits, I will go, by way of you, to Spain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And I know that, when I come to you, it will be with a full measure of blessing from Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I beg you, then, friends, by Jesus Christ, our Lord, and by the love inspired by the Spirit, to join me in earnest prayer to God on my behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Pray that I may be rescued from those in Judea who reject the faith, and that the help which I am taking to Jerusalem may prove acceptable to Christ\uc1\u8217*s people;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}so that, God willing, I may be able to come to you with a joyful heart, and enjoy some rest among you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}May God, the giver of peace, be with you all. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}I commend to your care our sister, Phoebe, who is a minister of the church at Cenchreae;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and I ask you to give her a Christian welcome \uc1\u8211* one worthy of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people \uc1\u8211* and to aid her in any matter in which she may need your assistance. She has proved herself a staunch friend and protector and to many others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Give my greeting to Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in the cause of Christ Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}who risked their own lives to save mine. It is not I alone who thank them, but all the churches among the Gentiles thank them also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Give my greeting, also, to the church that meets at their house, as well as to my dear friend Epaenetus, one of the first in Roman Asia to believe in Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}to Mary, who worked hard for you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}to Andronicus and Junia, fellow Jews and once my fellow prisoners, who are people of note among the apostles, and who became Christians before I did;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}to my dear Christian friend Ampliatus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}to Urban, our fellow worker in the cause of Christ, and to my dear friend Stachys;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}to that tried and true Christian Apelles; to the household of Aristobulus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}to my countryman Herodion; to the Christians in the household of Narcissus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}to Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who have worked hard for the Master; to my dear friend Persis, for she has done much hard work for the Master;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}to that eminent Christian, Rufus, and to his mother, who has been a mother to me also;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and our friends with them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}also to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and to all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people who are with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Greet one another with a sacred kiss. All the churches of the Christ send you greetings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I beg you, friends, to be on your guard against people who, by disregarding the teaching which you received, cause divisions and create difficulties; dissociate yourselves from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For such persons are not serving Christ, our Master, but are slaves to their own appetites; and, by their smooth words and flattery, they deceive simple-minded people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Everyone has heard of your ready obedience. It is true that I am very happy about you, but I want you to be well versed in all that is good, and innocent of all that is bad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And God, the giver of peace, will before long crush Satan under your feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
May the blessing of Jesus, our Lord, be with you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Timothy, my fellow worker, sends you his greetings, and Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my countrymen, send theirs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I Tertius, who am writing this letter, send you my Christian greeting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}My host Gaius, who extends his hospitality to the whole church, sends you his greeting; and Erastus, the city treasurer, and Quartus, our dear friend, add theirs.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}  Some later manuscripts add: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now to him who is able to strengthen you, as promised in the good news entrusted to me and in the proclamation of Jesus Christ, in accordance with the revelation of that hidden purpose, which in past ages was kept secret but now has been revealed{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and, in obedience to the command of the immortal God, made known through the writings of the prophets to all nations, to secure submission to the faith \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}to him, I say, the wise and only God, be ascribed, through Jesus Christ, all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
\par}

}