{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Acts (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Acts

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 of the Apostles

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 The Church and the Jews

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Acts of the Apostles Peter and John

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The first account which I drew up, Theophilus, dealt with all that Jesus did and taught from the very first,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}down to that day on which he was taken up to heaven, after he had, by the help of the Holy Spirit, given instructions to the apostles whom he had chosen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}With abundant proofs, he showed himself to them, still living, after his death; appearing to them from time to time during forty days, and speaking of all that related to the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And once, when he had gathered them together, he charged them not to leave Jerusalem, but to wait there for the fulfillment of the Father\uc1\u8217*s promise \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*that promise,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*of which you have heard me speak;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for, while John baptized with water, you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit before many days have passed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So, when the apostles had met together, they asked Jesus this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Master, is this the time when you intend to re-establish the kingdom for Israel?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}His answer was, \uc1\u8220*It is not for you to know times or hours, for the Father has reserved these for his own decision;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}but you will receive power, when the Holy Spirit will have descended on you, and will be witnesses for me not only in Jerusalem, but throughout Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}No sooner had Jesus said this than he was caught up before their eyes, and a cloud received him from their sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}While they were still gazing up into the heavens, as he went, suddenly two men, clothed in white, stood beside them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and said, \uc1\u8220*People of Galilee, why are you standing here looking up into the heavens? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into the heavens, will come in the same way in which you have seen him go into the heavens.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the hill called Olivet, which is about three quarters of a mile from the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When they reached Jerusalem, they went to the upstairs room, where they were staying. There were there Peter, John, James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They all united in devoting themselves to prayer, and so did some women, and Mary, the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}About this time, at a meeting of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, when there were about a hundred and twenty present, Peter rose to speak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*Friends,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*it was necessary that the prediction of scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit made by the lips of David about Judas, who acted as guide to the men who arrested Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for he was one of our number and had his part allotted him in this work of ours.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}(This man had bought a piece of land with the price of his treachery; and, falling heavily, his body had burst open, and all his bowels protruded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This became known to everyone living in Jerusalem, so that the field came to be called, in their language, \uc1\u8216*Akeldama,\uc1\u8217* which means the \uc1\u8216*Field of Blood.\uc1\u8217*)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*For in the book of Psalms,\uc1\u8221* Peter continued, \uc1\u8220*it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Let his home become desolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and let no one live in it\uc1\u8217*;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 and also \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*His office let another take.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore, from among the men who have been with us all the time that Jesus, our Master, went in and out among us \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}from his baptism by John down to that day on which he was taken from us \uc1\u8211* someone must be found to join us as a witness of his resurrection.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So they put forward two men, Joseph called Barsabbas, whose other name was Justus, and Matthias;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and they offered this prayer \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Lord, who reads all hearts, show which of these two men you have chosen{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}to take the place in this apostolic work, which Judas has abandoned, to go to his proper place.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then they drew lots between them; and, the lot having fallen to Matthias, he was added to the number of the eleven apostles.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}In the course of the Festival at the close of the Harvest the disciples had all met together,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}when suddenly there came from the heavens a noise like a strong wind rushing by; it filled the whole house in which they were sitting.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then there appeared tongues of what seemed to be flame, separating, so that one settled on each of them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak in different languages as the Spirit prompted their utterances.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now there were then staying in Jerusalem religious Jews from every country in the world;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, when this sound was heard, numbers of people collected, in the greatest excitement, because each of them heard the disciples speaking in his own language.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They were utterly amazed, and kept asking in astonishment, \uc1\u8220*What! Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then how is it that we each of us hear them in our own language?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Some of us are Parthians, some Medes, some Elamites; and some of us live in Mesopotamia, in Judea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Roman Asia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}in Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the districts of Libya adjoining Cyrene; some of us are visitors from Rome,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}either Jews by birth or converts, and some are Cretans and Arabians \uc1\u8211* yet we all alike hear them speaking in our own languages of the great things that God has done.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They were all utterly amazed and bewildered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*What does it mean?\uc1\u8221* they asked one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But there were some who said with a sneer, \uc1\u8220*They have had too much new wine.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Peter, surrounded by the eleven other apostles, stood up, and, raising his voice, addressed the crowd. \uc1\u8220*People of Judea,\uc1\u8221* he began, \uc1\u8220*and all you who are staying in Jerusalem, let me tell you what this means. Mark well my words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}These people are not drunk, as you suppose; for it is only now nine in the morning! No!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This is what is spoken of in the prophet Joel \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*It will come about in the last days,\uc1\u8217* God says,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*That I will pour out my Spirit on all humanity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your sons and your daughters will become prophets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your young men will see visions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and your old men dream dreams;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}yes, even on the slaves \uc1\u8211* for they are mine \uc1\u8211* both men and women,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will in those days pour out my Spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and they will become prophets;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and I will show wonders in the heavens above,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and signs on the earth below \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 blood and fire and mist of smoke;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}the sun will become darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the moon blood-red,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before the day of the Lord comes \uc1\u8211* that great and awful day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then will everyone who invokes the name of the Lord be saved.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}People of Israel, listen to what I am saying. Jesus of Nazareth, a man whose mission from God to you was proved by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God showed among you through him, as you know full well \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}he, I say, in accordance with God\uc1\u8217*s definite plan and with his previous knowledge, was betrayed, and you, by the hands of lawless men, nailed him to a cross and put him to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But God released him from the pangs of death and raised him to life, it being impossible for death to retain its hold on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Indeed he was the one David was referring to when he said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I have had the Lord ever before my eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he stands at my right hand, so that I should not be disquieted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Therefore my heart was cheered, and my tongue told its delight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yes, even my body, too, will rest in hope;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For you will not abandon my soul to Hades,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor surrender me, your holy one, to undergo corruption.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You have shown me the path to life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will fill me with gladness in your presence.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Friends, I can speak to you the more confidently about the patriarch David, because he is dead and buried, and his tomb is here among us to this very day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}David, then, prophet as he was, knowing that God had solemnly sworn to him to set one of his descendants on his throne, looked into the future,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and referred to the resurrection of the Christ when he said that he had not been abandoned to Hades, nor had his body undergone corruption.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}It was this Jesus, whom God raised to life; and of that we are ourselves all witnesses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And now that he has been exalted to the right hand of God, and has received from the Father the promised gift of the Holy Spirit, he has begun to pour out that gift, as you yourselves now see and hear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}It was not David who went up into heaven; for he himself says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The Lord said to my master, \uc1\u8220*Sit on my right hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Until I put your enemies as a footstool under your feet.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}So let the whole nation of Israel know beyond all doubt, that God has made him both Lord and Christ \uc1\u8211* this Jesus whom you crucified.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}When the people heard this, they were conscience-smitten, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, \uc1\u8220*Friends, what can we do?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8220*Repent,\uc1\u8221* answered Peter, \uc1\u8220*and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins; and then you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}For the promise is for you and for your children, and also for all those now far away, who may be called by the Lord our God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Peter spoke to them for a long time using many other arguments and pleaded with them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Save yourselves from the perverse spirit of this age.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}So those who accepted his teaching were baptized, and about three thousand people joined the disciples on that day alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}They devoted themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to the Common life of the church, to the breaking of the bread and to the Prayers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}A deep impression was made on everyone, and many wonders and signs were done at the hands of the apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}All who became believers in Christ held everything for the common use;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}they sold their property and their goods, and shared the proceeds among them all, according to their individual needs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Every day they devoted themselves to meeting together in the Temple Courts, and to the breaking of bread at their homes, while they partook of their food in simple-hearted gladness, praising God, and winning the goodwill of all the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}And the Lord daily added to their company those who were in the path of salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}One day, as Peter and John were going up into the Temple Courts for the three o\uc1\u8217*clock Prayers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}a man, who had been lame from his birth, was being carried by. This man used to be set down every day at the gate of the Temple called \uc1\u8216*the Beautiful Gate,\uc1\u8217* to beg of those who went in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Seeing Peter and John on the point of entering, he asked them to give him something.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Peter fixed his eyes on him, and so did John, and then Peter said, \uc1\u8220*Look at us.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The man was all attention, expecting to get something from them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but Peter added, \uc1\u8220*I have no gold or silver, but I give you what I have. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Grasping the lame man by the right hand, Peter lifted him up. Instantly the man\uc1\u8217*s feet and ankles became strong,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and, leaping up, he stood and began to walk about, and then went with them into the Temple Courts, walking, and leaping, and praising God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}All the people saw him walking about and praising God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and, when they recognized him as the man who used to sit begging at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, they were utterly astonished and amazed at what had happened to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}While the man still clung to Peter and John, the people all quickly gathered around them in the Colonnade named after Solomon, in the greatest astonishment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On seeing this, Peter said to the people, \uc1\u8220*People of Israel, why are you surprised at this? And why do you stare at us, as though we, by any power or piety of our own, had enabled this man to walk?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our ancestors, has done honor to his servant Jesus \uc1\u8211* him whom you gave up and disowned before Pilate, when he had decided to set him free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You, I say, disowned the holy and righteous one, and asked for the release of a murderer!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The guide to life you put to death! But God raised him from the dead \uc1\u8211* and of that we are ourselves witnesses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And it is by faith in the name of Jesus, that this man, whom you all see and know, has \uc1\u8211* by his name \uc1\u8211* been made strong. Yes, it is the faith inspired by Jesus that has made this complete cure of the man, before the eyes of you all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And yet, my friends, I know that you acted as you did from ignorance, and your rulers also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But it was in this way that God fulfilled all that he had long ago foretold, as to the sufferings of his Christ, by the lips of all the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore, repent and turn so that your sins may be wiped away; so that happier times may come from the Lord himself,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and so that he may send you, in Jesus, your long-appointed Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But heaven must be his home, until the days of the Universal Restoration, of which God has spoken by the lips of his holy prophets from the very first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Moses himself said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The Lord your God will raise up from among yourselves a prophet, as he raised me. To him you will listen whenever he speaks to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And it will be that should anyone among the people not listen to that prophet, he will be utterly destroyed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel onwards, and all their successors who had a message to deliver, told of these days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}You yourselves are the heirs of the prophets, and heirs, too, of the covenant which God made with your ancestors, when he said to Abraham \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*In your descendants will all the nations of the earth be blessed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For you, first, God raised up his servant, and sent him to bless you, by turning each one of you from his wicked ways.\uc1\u8221*{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}While Peter and John were still speaking to the people, the chief priest, with the officer in charge at the Temple and the Sadducees, came up to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}much annoyed because they were teaching the people, and because, through Jesus, they were preaching the resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They arrested the apostles and, as it was already evening, had them placed in custody until the next day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Many, however, of those who had heard the apostles\uc1\u8217* message became believers in Christ, the number of the men alone amounting to about five thousand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The next day, a meeting of the leaders of the people, the elders, and the teachers of the Law was held in Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There were present Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all who were of High-Priestly rank.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They had Peter and John brought before them, and questioned them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*By what power,\uc1\u8221* they asked, \uc1\u8220*Or in whose name have men like you done this thing?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then, Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said, \uc1\u8220*Leaders of the people and elders,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}since we are on our trial today for a kind act done to a helpless man, and are asked in what way the man here before you has been cured,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}let me tell you all and all the people of Israel, that it is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified and whom God raised from the dead \uc1\u8211* it is, I say, by his name that this man stands here before you lame no longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Jesus is \uc1\u8216*the stone which, scorned by you the builders, has yet become the corner stone.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And salvation is in him alone; for there is no other name in the whole world, given to people, to which we must look for our salvation.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When the Council saw how boldly Peter and John spoke, and found that they were uneducated men of humble station, they were surprised, and realized that they had been companions of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, when they looked at the man who had been healed, standing there with them, they had nothing to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So they ordered them out of court, and then began consulting together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*What are we to do to these men?\uc1\u8221* they asked one another. \uc1\u8220*That a remarkable sign has been given through them is obvious to everyone living in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, to prevent this thing from spreading further among the people, let us warn them not to speak in this name any more to anyone whatever.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So they called the apostles in, and ordered them not to speak or teach in the name of Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But Peter and John replied, \uc1\u8220*Whether it is right, in the sight of God, to listen to you rather than to him \uc1\u8211* judge for yourselves,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for we cannot help speaking of what we have seen and heard.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}However, after further warnings, the Council set them at liberty, not seeing any safe way of punishing them, because of the people, for they were all praising God for what had occurred;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}for the man who was the subject of this miraculous cure was more than forty years old.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After they had been set at liberty, the apostles went to their friends and told them what the chief priests and the elders had said to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}All who heard their story, moved by a common impulse, raised their voices to God in prayer:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Sovereign Lord, it is you who has made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and who, by the lips of our ancestor, your servant David, who spoke under the influence of the Holy Spirit, have said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Why did the nations rage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and the peoples form vain designs?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The kings of the earth set their array,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and its rulers gathered together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 against the Lord and against his Christ.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}There have indeed gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you has consecrated the Christ, not Herod and Pontius Pilate only, but the nations and the people of Israel besides \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}yet only to do what you, by your power and of your own will, did long ago destine to be done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Now, therefore, Lord, mark their threats, and enable your servants, with all fearlessness, to tell your message,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}while you stretch out your hand to heal, and cause signs and wonders to take place through the name of your holy servant Jesus.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When their prayer was ended, the place in which they were assembled was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to tell God\uc1\u8217*s message fearlessly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The whole body of those who had become believers in Christ were of one heart and mind. Not one of them claimed any of his goods as his own, but everything was held for the common use.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The apostles continued with great power to bear their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and God\uc1\u8217*s blessing rested on them all abundantly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Nor was there anyone in need among them, for all who were owners of land or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the sales{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and laid them at the apostles\uc1\u8217* feet; and then everyone received a share in proportion to his wants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}A Levite of Cyprian birth, named Joseph, (who had received from the apostles the additional name of \uc1\u8216*Barnabas\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* which means \uc1\u8216*The Consoler,\uc1\u8217*){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Sold a farm that belonged to him, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles\uc1\u8217* feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}There was, however, a man named Ananias, who, with his wife Sapphira, sold some property,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, with her connivance, kept back some of the proceeds. He brought only a part and laid it at the apostles\uc1\u8217* feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*Ananias,\uc1\u8221* Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*how is it that Satan has so taken possession of your heart that you have lied to the Holy Spirit, and kept back a part of the money paid for the land?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}While it was unsold, was not it your own? And after it was sold, was not the money at your own disposal? How did you come to think of such a thing? You have lied, not to people, but to God!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As Ananias heard these words, he fell down and expired; and everyone who heard of it was appalled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The young men got up, and, winding the body in a sheet, carried it out and buried it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Is it true,\uc1\u8221* Peter asked, addressing her, \uc1\u8220*that you sold your land for such a sum?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Yes,\uc1\u8221* she answered, \uc1\u8220*we did.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Peter said, \uc1\u8220*How did you come to agree to provoke the Spirit of the Lord? Listen! The footsteps of those who have buried your husband are at the door; and they will carry you out too.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Instantly Sapphira fell down at Peter\uc1\u8217*s feet and expired. On coming in, the young men found her dead; so they carried her out and buried her by her husband\uc1\u8217*s side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The whole church and all who heard of these events were appalled.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Many signs and wonders continued to occur among the people, through the instrumentality of the apostles, whose custom it was to meet all together in the Colonnade of Solomon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}but of the rest no one ventured to join them. On the other hand, the people were full of their praise,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and still larger numbers, both of men and women, as they became believers in the Lord, were added to their number.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The consequence was that people would bring out their sick even into the streets, and lay them on mattresses and mats, in the hope that, as Peter came by, at least his shadow might fall on someone of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Besides this, the inhabitants of the towns around Jerusalem flocked into the city, bringing with them their sick and those who were troubled by foul spirits; and they were cured everyone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At this the high priest was roused to action, and he and all his supporters (who formed the party of the Sadducees), moved by jealousy,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}arrested the apostles, and had them placed in custody.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}An angel of the Lord, however, opened the prison doors at night and led them out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*Go,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and stand in the Temple Courts, and tell the people the whole message of this new life.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When they heard this, they went at daybreak into the Temple Courts, and began to teach. The high priest and his party, on their arrival, summoned the High Council, including all the leaders of the people among the Israelites, and sent to the jail to fetch the apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But, when the officers got there, they did not find them in the prison; so they returned and reported that,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}while they had found the goal barred securely and the guards posted at the doors, yet, on opening them, they had not found anyone inside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When the officer in charge at the Temple and the chief priests heard their story, they were perplexed about the apostles and as to what all this would lead to.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Presently, however, someone came and told them, that the men whom they had put in prison were actually standing in the Temple Courts, teaching the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then, the officer went with his men and fetched the apostles \uc1\u8211* without using violence, for they were afraid of being stoned by the people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and then brought them before the Council. The high priest demanded an explanation from them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*We gave you strict orders,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*not to teach in this name. Yet you have actually flooded Jerusalem with your teaching, and you want to make us responsible for the death of this man.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}To this Peter and the apostles replied, \uc1\u8220*We must obey God rather than people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The God of our ancestors raised Jesus, whom you put to death by hanging him on a cross.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}It is this Jesus whom God has exalted to his right hand, to be a guide and a Savior, to give Israel repentance and forgiveness of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And we are witness to the truth of this, and so is the Holy Spirit \uc1\u8211* the gift of God to those who obey him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The members of the Council became frantic with rage on hearing this, and were for putting the apostles to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But Gamaliel, a Pharisee, who was a Doctor of the Law and who was held in universal respect, rose in the Council, and directed that the men should be taken out of court for a little while.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}He then said, \uc1\u8220*People of Israel, take care as to what you intend to do with these men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For not long ago Theudas appeared, professing to be somebody, and was joined by a body of some four hundred men. But he was killed; and all his followers scattered and dwindled away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}After him, Judas the Galilean appeared at the time of the census, and induced people to follow him; yet he, too, perished and all his followers were dispersed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And, in this present case, my advice to you is not to interfere with these men, but to leave them alone, for, if their designs and their work are merely of human origin, they will come to an end;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}but, if they are of divine origin, you will be powerless to put an end to them \uc1\u8211* or else you may find yourselves fighting against God!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}The Council followed his advice, and, calling the apostles in, had them flogged, and then, after cautioning them not to speak in the name of Jesus, set them free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But the apostles left the Council, rejoicing that they had been thought worthy to suffer disgrace for that name;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and never for a single day, either in the Temple Courts or in private houses, did they cease to teach, or to tell the good news of Jesus, the Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}About this time, when the number of the disciples was constantly increasing, complaints were made by the Greek speaking Jews against the Aramaic speaking Jews, that their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The Twelve, therefore, called together the general body of the disciples and said to them, \uc1\u8220*It is not well for us to see to the distribution at the tables and neglect God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore, friends, look for seven men of reputation among yourselves, wise and spiritually-minded men, and we will appoint them to attend to this matter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}while we, for our part, will devote ourselves to prayer, and to the delivery of the message.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}This proposal was unanimously agreed to; and the disciples chose Stephen \uc1\u8211* a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit \uc1\u8211* and Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicholas of Antioch, a former convert to Judaism;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and they brought these men to the apostles, who, after praying, placed their hands on them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So God\uc1\u8217*s message spread, and the number of the disciples continued to increase rapidly in Jerusalem, and a large body of the priests accepted the faith.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Meanwhile Stephen, divinely helped and strengthened, was showing great wonders and signs among the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But some members of the Synagogue of the Freed Slaves (as it was called), Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and Visitors from Cilicia and Roman Asia, were roused to action and began disputing with Stephen;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}yet they were quite unable to withstand the wisdom and the inspiration with which he spoke.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then they induced some men to assert that they had heard Stephen saying blasphemous things against Moses, and against God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and they stirred up the people, as well as the elders and the teachers of the Law, and set on Stephen, and arrested him, and brought him before the High Council.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There they produced witnesses who gave false evidence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*This man,\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*is incessantly saying things against this holy place and the Law;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}indeed, we have heard him declare that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and change the customs handed down to us by Moses.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The eyes of all the members of the Council were riveted on Stephen, and they saw his face looking like the face of an angel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Then the high priest asked, \uc1\u8220*Is this true?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Stephen replied, \uc1\u8220*Brothers and fathers, hear what I have to say. God, who manifests himself in the glory, appeared to our ancestor Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, and before he settled in Haran, and said to him \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Leave your country and your people, and come into the country that I will show you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And so Abraham left the country of the Chaldaeans and settled in Haran; and from there, after his father\uc1\u8217*s death, God caused him to migrate into this country, in which you are now living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God did not at that time give him any part of it, not even a foot of ground. But he promised to give him possession of it and his descendants after him, though at that time he had no child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}God\uc1\u8217*s words were these \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants will live in a foreign country, where they will be enslaved and ill-treated for four hundred years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But I myself will judge the nation, to which they will be enslaved,\uc1\u8217* God said, \uc1\u8216*and after that they will leave the country and worship me in this place.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then God made with Abraham the covenant of circumcision; and under it Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him when he was eight days old; and Isaac became the father of Jacob; and Jacob of the Twelve Patriarchs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The Patriarchs, out of jealousy, sold Joseph into slavery in Egypt; but God was with him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and delivered him out of all his troubles, and enabled him to win favor and show wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who appointed him Governor of Egypt and of his whole household.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then a famine spread over the whole of Egypt and Canaan, causing great distress, and our ancestors could find no food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Hearing, however, that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob sent our ancestors there on their first visit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In the course of their second visit, Joseph revealed himself to his brothers, and his family became known to Pharaoh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Joseph sent an urgent invitation to his father Jacob and to his relatives, seventy-five persons in all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and so Jacob went down into Egypt. There he died, and our ancestors also,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and their bodies were removed to Shechem, and laid in the tomb which Abraham had bought for a sum of money from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As the time drew near for the fulfillment of the promise which God had made to Abraham, the people increased largely in numbers in Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}until a new king, who knew nothing of Joseph, came to the throne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This king acted deceitfully towards our people and ill-treated our ancestors, making them abandon their own infants, so that they should not be reared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}It was just at this time that Moses was born. He was an exceedingly beautiful child, and for three months was brought up in his own father\uc1\u8217*s house;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and, when he was abandoned, the daughter of Pharaoh found him and brought him up as her own son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Moses was educated in all the learning of the Egyptians, and proved his ability both by his words and actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When he was in his fortieth year, he resolved to visit his fellow Israelites;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and, seeing an Israelite ill-treated, he defended him, and avenged the man, who was being wronged, by striking down the Egyptian.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He thought his own people would understand that God was using him to save them; but they failed to do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The next day he again appeared on the scene, when some of them were fighting, and tried to make peace between them. \uc1\u8216*Men,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*you are brothers; how is it that you are ill-treating one another?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But the man who was ill-treating his fellow workman pushed Moses aside saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who made you a ruler and judge over us?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Do you mean to make away with me as you did yesterday with that Egyptian?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At these words Moses took to flight, and became an exile in Midian; and there he had two sons born to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Forty years had passed when there appeared to him, in the desert of Mount Sinai, an angel in a flame of fire in a bush.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When Moses saw it, he was astonished at the vision; but on his going nearer to look at it more closely, the voice of the Lord was heard to say \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*I am the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.\uc1\u8217* Moses trembled, and did not dare to look.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then the Lord said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Take your sandals off your feet, for the spot where you are standing is holy ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}I have seen the oppression of my people who are in Egypt, and heard their groans, and I have come down to deliver them. Come now and I will send you into Egypt.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}This same Moses, whom they had disowned with the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who made you a ruler and a judge?\uc1\u8217* was the man whom God sent to be both a ruler and a deliverer, under the guidance of the angel that had appeared to him in the bush.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}He it was who led them out, after he had shown wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the desert during forty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}This was the Moses who said to the people of Israel \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*God will raise up for you, from among yourselves, a prophet, as he raised up me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}He, too, it was who was present at the assembly in the desert, with the angel who talked to him on Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors, and who received living truths to impart to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Yet our ancestors refused him obedience; more than that, they rejected him, and in their hearts turned back to Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}while they said to Aaron \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Make us Gods who will lead the way for us, since, as for this Moses who has brought us out of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}That was the time when they made the calf and offered sacrifice to their idol, and held festivities in honor of their own handiwork!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}So God turned from them and left them to the worship of the Starry Host, as is written in the book of the prophets \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Did you offer victims and sacrifices to me, house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all those forty years in the desert?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}You took with you the tent where Moloch is worshiped
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the star of the god Rephan \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the images which you had made to worship.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Therefore I will exile you beyond Babylon.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Our ancestors had the tent where they worshiped God in the desert, constructed, just as he who spoke to Moses had directed him to make it, after the model which he had seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}This tent, which was handed down to them, was brought into this country by our ancestors who accompanied Joshua (at the conquest of the nations that God drove out before their advance), and remained here until the time of David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}David found favor with God, and prayed that he might provide the God of Jacob with a place to reside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}But it was Solomon who built a house for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Yet it is not in buildings made by hands that the Most High dwells. As the prophet says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*The heavens are a throne for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the earth a stool for my feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What manner of house will you build me, asks the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or what place is there where I may rest?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Was it not my hand that made all these things?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Stubborn people, heathen in heart and ears, you are for ever resisting the Holy Spirit; your ancestors did it, and you are doing it still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}Which of the prophets escaped persecution at their hands? They killed those who foretold the coming of the righteous one; of whom you, in your turn, have now become the betrayers and murderers \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}you who received the Law as transmitted by angels and yet failed to keep it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}As they listened to this, the Council grew frantic with rage, and gnashed their teeth at Stephen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}He, filled as he was with the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes intently on the heavens, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}\uc1\u8220*Look,\uc1\u8221* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}At this, with a loud shout, they stopped their ears and all rushed on him, forced him outside the city,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}and began to stone him, the witnesses laying their clothes at the feet of a young man named Saul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}And they stoned Stephen, while he cried to the Lord, \uc1\u8220*Lord Jesus! Receive my spirit!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}Falling on his knees, he called out loudly, \uc1\u8220*Lord! Do not charge them with this sin;\uc1\u8221* and with these words he fell asleep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Saul approved of his being put to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
On that very day a great persecution broke out against the church which was in Jerusalem; and its members, with the exception of the apostles, were all scattered over the districts of Judea and Samaria.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Some religious men buried Stephen, with loud lamentations for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Saul began to devastate the church; he entered house after house, dragged out men and women alike, and threw them into prison.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now those who were scattered in different directions went from place to place proclaiming the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and there began to preach the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The people, one and all, listened attentively to what Philip told them, when they heard of, and saw, the miracles which he was working.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For there were many instances of people with foul spirits, where the spirits, with loud screams, came out of them; and many who were paralyzed or lame were cured,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}so that there was great rejoicing throughout that city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There was staying in the city a man named Simon, who had been practicing magic there and mystifying the Samaritan people, giving himself out to be some great being.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Everyone, high and low, paid attention to him. \uc1\u8216*This man,\uc1\u8217* they used to say, \uc1\u8216*must be that power of God which people call \uc1\u8220*The Great Power.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And they paid attention to him because they had for a long time been mystified by his magic arts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}However, when they came to believe Philip, as he told them the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Even Simon believed, and after his baptism attached himself to Philip, and was in his turn mystified at seeing signs and great miracles constantly occurring.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When the apostles at Jerusalem heard that the Samaritans had welcomed God\uc1\u8217*s message, they sent Peter and John to them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and they, on their arrival, prayed that the Samaritans might receive the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}(As yet the Spirit had not descended on any of them; they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Peter and John placed their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When Simon saw that it was through the placing of the apostles\uc1\u8217* hands on them that the Spirit was given, he brought them a sum of money and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8220*Give me also this power of yours, so that, if I place my hands on anyone, he may receive the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*A curse on you and on your silver,\uc1\u8221* Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*for thinking that God\uc1\u8217*s free gift can be bought with money!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}You have no share or part in our message, for your heart is not right with God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore repent of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord, that, if possible, you may be forgiven for such a thought;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}for I see that you have fallen into the bitterness of envy and the fetters of sin.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Pray to the Lord for me, all of you,\uc1\u8221* Simon answered, \uc1\u8220*so that none of the things you have spoken of may happen to me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Peter and John, having borne their testimony and delivered the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message, returned to Jerusalem, telling the good news, as they went, in many Samaritan villages.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Meanwhile an angel of the Lord had said to Philip, \uc1\u8220*Set out on a journey southwards, along the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gaza.\uc1\u8221* (It is now deserted).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So Philip set out on a journey; and on his way he came on an official of high rank, in the service of Candace, Queen of the Abyssinians. He was her treasurer, and had been to Jerusalem to worship,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and was now on his way home, sitting in his carriage and reading the prophet Isaiah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The Spirit said to Philip, \uc1\u8220*Go up to the carriage over there and keep close to it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}So Philip ran up, and he heard the Abyssinian reading the prophet Isaiah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Do you understand what you are reading?\uc1\u8221* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*How can I,\uc1\u8221* the other answered, \uc1\u8220*unless someone will explain it to me?\uc1\u8221* and he invited Philip to get up and sit by his side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The passage of scripture which he was reading was this \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Like a sheep, he was led away to slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and as a lamb is dumb in the hands of its shearer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so he refrains from opening his lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He was humiliated and justice was denied him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who will tell the story of his generation?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For his life is cut off from earth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8220*Now,\uc1\u8221* said the Treasurer, addressing Philip, \uc1\u8220*tell me, of whom is the prophet speaking? Of himself, or of someone else?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Then Philip began, and, taking this passage as his text, told him the good news about Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Presently, as they were going along the road, they came to some water, and the Treasurer exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*Look! Here is water; what is to prevent my being baptized?\uc1\u8221*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}  Some later manuscripts add: Philip said, \uc1\u8220*If you believe with your whole heart, you may.\uc1\u8221* And he replied, \uc1\u8220*I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.\uc1\u8221* }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}So he ordered the carriage to stop, and they went down into the water \uc1\u8211* both Philip and the Treasurer \uc1\u8211* and Philip baptized him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But, when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the Treasurer saw no more of him; for he continued his journey with a joyful heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But Philip was found at Ashdod, and, as he went on his way, he told the good news in all the towns through which he passed, until he came to Caesarea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Meanwhile Saul, still breathing murderous threats against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and asked him to give him letters to the Jewish congregations at Damascus, authorizing him, if he found there any supporters of the Way, whether men or women, to have them put in chains and brought to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}While on his journey, as he was nearing Damascus, suddenly a light from the heavens flashed around him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Who are you, Lord?\uc1\u8221* he asked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,\uc1\u8221* the voice answered;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*Yet stand up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The men traveling with Saul were meanwhile standing speechless; they heard the sound of the voice, but saw no one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Saul got up from the ground, though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So his men led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and for three days he was unable to see, and took nothing either to eat or to drink.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now there was at Damascus a disciple named Ananias, to whom, in a vision, the Lord said, \uc1\u8220*Ananias.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Yes, Lord,\uc1\u8221* he answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*Go at once,\uc1\u8221* said the Lord, \uc1\u8220*to the Straight Street, and ask at Judas\uc1\u8217*s house for a man named Saul, from Tarsus. He is at this moment praying,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and he has seen, in a vision, a man named Ananias coming in and placing his hands on him, so that he may recover his sight.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*Lord,\uc1\u8221* exclaimed Ananias, \uc1\u8220*I have heard from many people about this man \uc1\u8211* how much harm he has done at Jerusalem to your people there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And, here, too, he holds authority from the chief priests to put in chains all those who invoke your name.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But the Lord said to him, \uc1\u8220*Go, for this man is my chosen instrument to uphold my name before the Gentiles and their kings, and the people of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will myself show him all that he has to suffer for my name.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So Ananias went, entered the house, and, placing his hands on Saul, said, \uc1\u8220*Saul, my brother, I have been sent by the Lord \uc1\u8211* by Jesus, who appeared to you on your way here \uc1\u8211* so that you may recover your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Instantly it seemed as if a film fell from Saul\uc1\u8217*s eyes, and his sight was restored. Then he got up and was baptized,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and, after he had taken food, he felt his strength return.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Saul stayed for some days with the disciples who were at Damascus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and at once began in the synagogues to proclaim Jesus as the Son of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}All who heard him were amazed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Is not this,\uc1\u8221* they asked, \uc1\u8220*the man who worked havoc in Jerusalem among those that invoke this name, and who had also come here for the express purpose of having such persons put in chains and taken before the chief priests?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Saul\uc1\u8217*s influence, however, kept steadily increasing, and he confounded the Jewish people who lived in Damascus by the proofs that he gave that Jesus was the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After some time some of them laid a plot to kill Saul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but it became known to him. They even watched the gates day and night, to kill him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}but his disciples let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}On his arrival in Jerusalem, Saul attempted to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, as they did not believe that he was really a disciple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Barnabas, however, taking him by the hand, brought him to the apostles, and told them the whole story of how Saul on his journey had seen the Lord, and how the Lord had talked to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken out fearlessly in the name of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}After that, Saul remained in Jerusalem, in close contact with the apostles; and he spoke fearlessly in the name of the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}talking and arguing with the Jews of foreign birth, who, however, made attempts to kill him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But, when the followers found this out, they took him down to Caesarea, and sent him on his way to Tarsus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And so it came about that the church, throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, enjoyed peace and became firmly established; and, ordering its life by respect for the Lord and the help of the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Peter, while traveling from place to place throughout the country, went down to visit the people of Christ living at Lydda.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}There he found a man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years with paralysis.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8220*Aeneas,\uc1\u8221* Peter said to him, \uc1\u8220*Jesus Christ cures you. Get up, and make your bed.\uc1\u8221* Aeneas got up at once;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and all the inhabitants of Lydda and of the Plain of Sharon saw him, and came over to the Lord\uc1\u8217*s side.
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}At Joppa there lived a disciple whose name was Tabitha, which is in Greek \uc1\u8216*Dorcas\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* a Gazelle. Her life was spent in doing kind and charitable actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Just at that time she was taken ill, and died; and they had washed her body and laid it out in an upstairs room.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Joppa was near Lydda, and the disciples, having heard that Peter was at Lydda, sent two men with the request that he come to them without delay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Peter returned with them at once. On his arrival, he was taken upstairs, and all the widows came around him in tears, showing the coats and other clothing which Dorcas had made while she was among them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But Peter sent everybody out of the room, and knelt down and prayed. Then, turning to the body, he said, \uc1\u8220*Tabitha! Stand up.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
She opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Giving her his hand, Peter raised her up, and, calling in the widows and others of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, presented her to them alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}This became known all through Joppa, and numbers of people came to believe in the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And Peter stayed some days at Joppa with a tanner named Simon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in the regiment known as the \uc1\u8216*Italian Regiment,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}A religious man and one who reverenced God, with all his household. He was liberal in his charities to the people, and prayed to God constantly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}One afternoon, about three o\uc1\u8217*clock, he distinctly saw in a vision an angel from God come to him, and call him by name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Cornelius fixed his eyes on him and, in great alarm, said, \uc1\u8220*What is it, Lord?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Your prayers and your charities,\uc1\u8221* the angel answered, \uc1\u8220*have been an acceptable offering to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And now, send messengers to Joppa and fetch a man called Simon, who is also known as Peter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He is lodging with a tanner named Simon, who has a house near the sea.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When the angel, who had spoken to him, had gone, Cornelius called two servants and a religious soldier, who was one of his constant attendants,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and, after telling them the whole story, sent them to Joppa.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On the next day, while these men were on their way, just as they were nearing the town, Peter went up on the housetop about midday to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He became hungry and wanted something to eat; but while it was being prepared, he fell into a trance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and saw that the heavens were open, and that something like a great sail was descending, let down by its four corners towards the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In it were all kinds of quadrupeds, reptiles, and birds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then he was aware of a voice which said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Stand up, Peter, kill something, and eat.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*No, Lord, I cannot,\uc1\u8221* answered Peter, \uc1\u8220*for I have never eaten anything defiled and unclean.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Again he was aware of a voice which said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*What God has pronounced clean, do not regard as defiled.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This happened three times, and then suddenly it was all taken up into the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}While Peter was still perplexed as to the meaning of the vision that he had seen, the men sent by Cornelius, having enquired the way to Simon\uc1\u8217*s house, came up to the gate,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and called out and asked if the Simon, who was also known as Peter, was lodging there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Peter was still pondering over the vision, when the Spirit said to him, \uc1\u8220*There are two men looking for you at this moment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Go down at once and do not hesitate to go with them, for I have sent them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Peter went down to the men and said, \uc1\u8220*I am the person you are looking for. What is your reason for coming?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The men replied, \uc1\u8220*Our centurion, Cornelius, a pious man who reverences God and is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, has been instructed by a holy angel to send for you to his house, and to listen to what you have to say.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So Peter invited them in and entertained them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The next day he lost no time in setting out with them, accompanied by some of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers from Joppa;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and the day following he entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them, and had invited his relatives and intimate friends to meet them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So, when Peter entered the city, Cornelius met him, and, throwing himself at Peter\uc1\u8217*s feet, bowed to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Peter, however, lifted him up, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8220*Stand up, I am only human like yourself.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Talking with him as he went, Peter entered the house, where he found a large gathering of people, to whom he said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*You are doubtless aware that it is forbidden for a Jew to be intimate with a foreigner, or even to enter his house; and yet God has shown me that I ought not to call anyone defiled or unclean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}That was why I came, when I was sent for, without raising any objection. And now I ask your reason for sending for me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8220*Just three days ago this very hour,\uc1\u8221* Cornelius said, \uc1\u8220*I was in my house, saying the Afternoon Prayers, when a man in dazzling clothing suddenly stood before me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Cornelius,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*your prayer has been heard, and your charities have been accepted, by God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Therefore send to Joppa, and invite the Simon, who is also known as Peter, to come here. He is lodging in the house of Simon the tanner, near the sea.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Accordingly I sent to you at once, and you have been so good as to come. And now we are all here in the presence of God, to listen to all that you have been instructed by the Lord to say.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then Peter began.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*I see, beyond all doubt,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*that God does not show partiality,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}but that in every nation he who reverences him and does what is right is acceptable to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}God has sent his message to the Israelites and told them, through Jesus Christ, the good news of peace \uc1\u8211* and Jesus is Lord of all!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}You yourselves know the story which spread through all Judea, how, beginning form Galilee, after the baptism which John proclaimed \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}the story, I mean, of Jesus of Nazareth, and how God consecrated him his Christ by enduing him with the Holy Spirit and with power; and how he went about doing good and curing all who were under the power of the devil, because God was with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}We are ourselves, too, witnesses to all that he did in Judea and in Jerusalem; yet they put him to death by hanging him on a cross!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}This Jesus God raised on the third day, and enabled him to appear,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}not indeed to everyone, but to witnesses chosen beforehand by God \uc1\u8211* to us, who ate and drank with him after his resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Further, God charged us to proclaim to the people, and solemnly affirm, that it is Jesus who has been appointed by God judge of the living and the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}To him it is that all the prophets bear witness, when they say that everyone who believes in him receives through his name forgiveness of sins.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Before Peter had finished saying these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all who were listening to the message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Those converts from Judaism, who had come with Peter, were amazed that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been bestowed even on the Gentiles;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}for they heard them speaking in different languages and extolling God. At this Peter asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}\uc1\u8220*Can anyone refuse the water for the baptism of these people, now that they have received the Holy Spirit as we did ourselves?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}And he directed that they should be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ; after which they asked him to stay there a few days longer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}The apostles and the followers throughout Judea heard that even the Gentiles had welcomed God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But, when Peter went up to Jerusalem, those who were converts from Judaism began to attack him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}on the ground that he had visited people who were not circumcised, and had taken meals with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Peter began to relate the facts to them as they had occurred.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*I was in the town of Joppa,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and was praying; and, while in a trance, I saw a vision. There was something like a great sail descending, let down by its four corners out of the heavens; and it came right down to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Looking intently at it, I began to distinguish quadrupeds, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and I also heard a voice saying to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Stand up, Peter, kill something and eat.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*No, Lord, I cannot,\uc1\u8217* I answered, \uc1\u8216*for nothing defiled or unclean has ever passed my lips.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then a second time there came a voice from the heavens. \uc1\u8216*What God has pronounced clean\uc1\u8217*, it said, \uc1\u8216*you must not call defiled.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This happened three times, and then all was drawn up again into the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}At that moment three men, who had been sent from Caesarea to see me, came up to the house in which we were.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The Spirit told me to go with them without hesitation. These six companions also went with me. And, when we came into the man\uc1\u8217*s house,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}he told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and how the angel had said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Send to Joppa and fetch the Simon, who is also known as Peter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}for he will tell you truths, which will prove the means of salvation to you and all your household.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I had but just begun to speak,\uc1\u8221* continued Peter, \uc1\u8220*when the Holy Spirit fell on them, exactly as on us at the first;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and I recalled the saying of the Master \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Since then, God had given them the very same gift as he gave us when we became believers in Jesus Christ the Master \uc1\u8211* who was I that I could thwart God?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}On hearing this statement, they said no more, but broke out into praise of God. \uc1\u8220*So even to the Gentiles,\uc1\u8221* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8220*God has granted the repentance which leads to life!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Now those who had been scattered in different directions, in consequence of the persecution that followed the death of Stephen, went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, telling the message \uc1\u8211* but only to Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Some of them, however, who were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, on coming to Antioch, addressed themselves also to the Jews of foreign birth, telling them the good news about that Lord Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The power of the Lord was with them, so that a great number who had learned to believe came over to the Lord\uc1\u8217*s side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The news about them reached the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}On coming there he saw to his great joy these tokens of the loving kindness of God, and encouraged them all to make up their minds to be faithful to the Lord \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For Barnabas was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith \uc1\u8211* and a large number of people took their stand on the Lord\uc1\u8217*s side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Afterward Barnabas left for Tarsus to look for Saul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and, when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. And so it came about that, for a whole year, they attended the meetings of the church there, and taught a large number of people; and it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called \uc1\u8216*Christians.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}During this time, some prophets came to Antioch from Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}One of them, named Agabus, came forward and, under the influence of the Spirit, foretold a great famine that was to spread over all the world \uc1\u8211* a famine which occurred in the reign of Claudius.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}So the disciples, without exception, determined, in proportion to their means, to send something to help the followers living in Judea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And this they did, sending it to the church elders by Barnabas and Saul.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}It was at that time that King Herod began to ill-treat some of the members of the church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He had James, the brother of John, beheaded;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and, when he saw that the Jews were pleased with this, he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (This was during the Festival of the unleavened bread.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}After seizing Peter, Herod put him in prison, and entrusted him to the keeping of four Guards of four soldiers each, intending, after the Passover, to bring him up before the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So Peter was kept in prison, but meanwhile the prayers of the church were being earnestly offered to God on his behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Just when Herod was intending to bring him before the people, on that very night Peter was asleep between two soldiers, chained to them both, while there were sentries in front of the door, guarding the prison.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Suddenly an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. The angel struck Peter on the side, and roused him with the words, \uc1\u8220*Get up quickly.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The chains dropped from his wrists, and then the angel said, \uc1\u8220*Put on your belt and sandals.\uc1\u8221* When Peter had done so, the angel added, \uc1\u8220*Throw your cloak around you and follow me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Peter followed him out, not knowing that what was happening under the angel\uc1\u8217*s guidance was real, but thinking that he was seeing a vision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Passing the first Guard, and then the second, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened to them of itself; and, when they had passed through that, and had walked along one street, all at once the angel left him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then Peter came to himself and said, \uc1\u8220*Now I know beyond all doubt that the Lord has sent his angel, and has rescued me from Herod\uc1\u8217*s hands and from all that the Jewish people have been expecting.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As soon as he realized what had happened, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John who was also known as Mark, where a number of people were gathered together, praying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On his knocking at the door in the gate, a maidservant, named Rhoda, came to answer it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}She recognized Peter\uc1\u8217*s voice, but in her joy left the gate unopened, and ran in, and told them that Peter was standing outside.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*You are mad!\uc1\u8221* they exclaimed. But, when she persisted that it was so, they said, \uc1\u8220*It must be his spirit!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Meanwhile Peter went on knocking, and, when they opened the gate and saw him, they were amazed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Peter signed to them with his hand to be silent, and then told them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison, adding, \uc1\u8220*Tell James and the others all this.\uc1\u8221* Then he left the house, and went away to another place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}In the morning there was a great stir among the soldiers \uc1\u8211* what could have become of Peter!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And, when Herod had made further search for him and failed to find him, he closely questioned the Guard, and ordered them away to execution. Then he went down from Judea to stay at Caesarea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}It happened that Herod was deeply offended with the people of Tyre and Sidon, but they went in a body to him, and, having succeeded in winning over Blastus, the Chamberlain, they begged Herod for a reconciliation, because their country was dependent on the king\uc1\u8217*s for its food supply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On an appointed day Herod, wearing his state robes, seated himself on his throne, and delivered an oration.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The people kept shouting, \uc1\u8220*It is the voice of God, and not of a person!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Instantly an angel of the Lord struck him, because he did not give God the glory; and he was attacked with worms, and died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Meanwhile the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message kept extending, and spreading far and wide.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When Barnabas and Saul had carried out their mission, they returned to Jerusalem, and took with them John, who was also known as Mark.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 The Church and the Gentiles

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Acts of the Apostle Paul

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Among the members of the church at Antioch there were several prophets and teachers \uc1\u8211* Barnabas, Simeon who was known by the name of \uc1\u8216*Black\uc1\u8217*, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen, foster-brother of Prince Herod, and Saul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}While they were engaged in the worship of the Lord and were fasting, the Holy Spirit said, \uc1\u8220*Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul, for the work to which I have called them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Accordingly, after fasting and prayer, they placed their hands on them and dismissed them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Barnabas and Saul, sent on this mission, as they were, by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and from there sailed to Cyprus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On reaching Salamis, they began to tell the message of God in the Jewish synagogues; and they had John with them as an assistant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After passing through the whole island, they reached Paphos, where they found an astrologer who pretended to be a prophet \uc1\u8211* a Jew by birth, whose name was Barjoshua.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He was at the court of the Governor, Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who sent for Barnabas and Saul and asked to be told God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But Elymas, the astrologer (for that is the meaning of the word), opposed them, eager to divert the Governor\uc1\u8217*s attention from the faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}However, Saul (who is the same as Paul), full of the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes on him and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*You incarnation of deceit and all fraud! You son of the devil! You opponent of all that is good! Will you never cease to divert the straight paths of the Lord? Listen!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The hand of the Lord is on you even now, and you will be blind for a time and unable to see the sun.\uc1\u8221* Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him, and he went feeling about for someone to guide him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When the Governor saw what had happened, he became a believer in Christ, being greatly impressed by the teaching about the Lord.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}After this, Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and went to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them and returned to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The others went on from Perga and arrived at Antioch in Pisidia. There they went into the synagogue on the Sabbath and took their seats.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}After the reading of the Law and the prophets, the synagogue leader sent them this message \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Friends, if you have any helpful words to address to the people, now is the time to speak.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So Paul rose and, motioning with his hand, said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*People of Israel and all here who worship God, hear what I have to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors, and during their stay in Egypt increased the prosperity of the people, and then with uplifted arm brought them out from that land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For about forty years he bore with them in the desert;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}then, after destroying seven heathen nations in Canaan, he allotted their land to this people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For about four hundred and fifty years. In later times he gave them Judges, of whom the prophet Samuel was the last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And, when they demanded a king, God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, who reigned for forty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After removing him, he raised David to the throne, and bore this testimony to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*In David, the son of Jesse, I have found a man after my own heart, who will carry out all my purposes.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}It was from this man\uc1\u8217*s descendants that God, in accordance with his promise, gave Israel a Savior \uc1\u8211* Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}John having first proclaimed, before the appearance of Jesus, a baptism on repentance for all the people of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}As John was drawing towards the end of his career, he said \uc1\u8216*What do you suppose that I am? I am not the Christ. But there is \uc1\u8220*one coming\uc1\u8221* after me, whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Brothers and sisters, descendants of Abraham, and all those among you who worship God, it was to us that the message of this salvation was sent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The people of Jerusalem and their leaders, failing to recognize Jesus, and not understanding the utterances of the prophets that are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They found no ground at all for putting him to death, and yet demanded his execution from Pilate;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and, after carrying out everything written about him, they took Jesus down from the cross, and laid him in a tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But God raised him from the dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and he appeared for many days to those who had gone up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, and who are now witnesses for him to the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}We also have good news to tell you, about the promise made to our ancestors \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}That our children have had this promise completely fulfilled to them by God, by his raising Jesus. That is just what is said in the second Psalm \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*You are my Son; this day I have become your Father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}As to his raising Jesus from the dead, never again to return to corruption, this is what is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will give to you the sacred promises made to David;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And, therefore, in another Psalm it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*You will not give up the Holy One to undergo corruption.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}David, after obediently doing God\uc1\u8217*s will in his own time, fell asleep and was laid by the side of his ancestors, and did undergo corruption;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}but Jesus, whom God raised from the dead, did not undergo corruption.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I would, therefore, like you to know, friends, that through Jesus forgiveness of sins is being proclaimed to you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and that, in union with him, everyone who believes in him is absolved from every sin from which under the Law of Moses you could not be absolved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Beware, therefore, that what is said in the prophets does not come true of you \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*Look, you despisers, and wonder, and perish;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for I am doing a deed in your days \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a deed which, though told you in full, you will never believe\uc1\u8217*.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}As Paul and Barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people begged for a repetition of this teaching on the next Sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}After the congregation had dispersed, many of the Jews, and of the converts who joined in their worship, followed Paul and Barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue to rely on the loving kindness of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}On the following Sabbath, almost all the city gathered to hear God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}But the sight of the crowds of people filled the minds of the Jews with jealousy, and they kept contradicting Paul\uc1\u8217*s statements in violent language.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Then Paul and Barnabas spoke out fearlessly, and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*It was necessary that the message of God should be told to you first; but, since you reject it and reckon yourselves not worthy of the eternal life \uc1\u8211* we turn to the Gentiles!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}For this is the Lord\uc1\u8217*s command to us \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I have destined you for a light to the Gentiles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a means of salvation to the ends of the earth\uc1\u8217*.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}On hearing this, the Gentiles were glad and extolled God\uc1\u8217*s message; and all those who had been enrolled for eternal life became believers in Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}and the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message was carried throughout that district.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But the Jews incited the women of high social standing who worshiped with them, and the leading men of the town, and started a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their region.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}They, however, shook the dust off their feet in protest,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}and went to Iconium, leaving the disciples full of joy and of the Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}The same thing occurred in Iconium, where Paul and Barnabas went into the Jewish synagogue, and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks believed in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the Gentiles, and poisoned their minds against the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore Paul and Barnabas spent a long time there, and spoke out fearlessly, relying on the Lord, who confirmed the message of his love by permitting signs and wonders to take place at their hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the townspeople were divided, some siding with the Jews, some with the apostles;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, when there was an attempt on the part of both Gentiles and Jews, with their leaders, to resort to violence and to stone them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}the apostles heard of it, and took refuge in Lystra and Derbe, towns in Lycaonia, and in the district around,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and there they continued to tell the good news.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the streets of Lystra there used to sit a man who had no power in his feet; he had been lame from his birth, and had never walked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This man was listening to Paul speaking, when Paul, looking intently at him, and seeing that he had the faith to be healed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}said loudly, \uc1\u8220*Stand upright on your feet.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
The man leaped up, and began walking about,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and the crowd, seeing what Paul had done, called out in the Lycaonian language, \uc1\u8220*The Gods have come down to us in human form.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So they called Barnabas \uc1\u8216*Zeus,\uc1\u8217* and Paul \uc1\u8216*Hermes,\uc1\u8217* because he took the lead in speaking;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and the priest of Zeus-beyond-the-Walls, accompanied by the crowd, brought bullocks and garlands to the gates, with the intention of offering sacrifices.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Friends, why are you doing this?\uc1\u8221* they shouted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*We are only people like yourselves, and we have come with the good news that you should turn away from these follies to a living God, who made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In bygone times he permitted all the nations to go their own ways.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Yet he has not failed to give you, in the good he does, some revelation of himself \uc1\u8211* sending you from heaven rain and fruitful seasons, and gladdening your hearts with plenty and good cheer.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Even with this appeal they could hardly restrain the people from offering sacrifice to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Presently, however, there came some Jews from Antioch, and Iconium who, after they had won over the people, stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the town, thinking him to be dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But, when the disciples had gathered around him, he got up and went back into the town; the next day he went with Barnabas to Derbe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}After telling the good news throughout that town, and making a number of converts, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}reassuring the minds of the disciples, urging them to remain true to the faith, and showing that it is only through many troubles that we can enter the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They also appointed elders for them in every church, and, after prayer and fasting, commended them to the Lord in whom they had learned to believe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Paul and Barnabas then went through Pisidia, and came into Pamphylia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and, after telling the message at Perga, went down to Attaleia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}From there they sailed to Antioch \uc1\u8211* the place where they had been committed to the gracious care of God for the work which they had now finished.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}After their arrival, they gathered the church together, and gave an account of all that God had helped them to do, and especially how he had opened to the Gentiles the door of faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and at Antioch they stayed with the disciples for a considerable time.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}But certain persons came down from Judea, and began to teach the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers that, unless they were circumcised, in accordance with the custom required by Moses, they could not be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This gave rise to a serious dispute, and much discussion, between Paul and Barnabas and these people, and it was therefore settled that Paul and Barnabas and others of their number should go up to Jerusalem, to consult the apostles and church elders about the matter under discussion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The church, therefore, sent them on their journey, and they made their way through Phoenicia and Samaria, telling the story of the conversion of the Gentiles, to the great joy of all the followers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On their arrival at Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the elders, and gave an account of all that God had helped them to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some of the Pharisees\uc1\u8217* party, however, who had become believers in Christ, came forward and declared that they were bound to circumcise converts and to direct them to observe the Law of Moses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The apostles and the church elders held a meeting to consider this question.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After much discussion, Peter rose and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*You, my friends, know well that long ago God singled me out \uc1\u8211* that through my lips the Gentiles should hear the message of the good news, and become believers in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now God, who reads all hearts, declared his acceptance of the Gentiles, by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He made no distinction between them and us, when he purified their hearts by their faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Why, then, do you now provoke God, by putting on the necks of these disciples a yoke which neither our ancestors nor we were able to bear?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}No, it is through the loving kindness of the Lord Jesus that we, just as they do, believe that we have been saved.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Every voice in the assembly was hushed, as they listened to Barnabas and Paul, while they gave an account of all the signs and wonders which God had shown among the Gentiles through them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}After they had finished speaking, James addressed the Council.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Friends,\uc1\u8221* he began, \uc1\u8220*hear what I have to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Simon has described the manner in which God first visited the Gentiles, in order to take from among them a people to bear his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And that is in harmony with the words of the prophets, where they say \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*After this I will return;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will rebuild the house of David which has fallen \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 its ruins I will rebuild,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will set it up once more;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}that so the rest of mankind may earnestly seek the Lord \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 even all the Gentiles on whom my name has been bestowed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}says the Lord, as he does these things, known from long ago.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In my judgment, therefore, we should not add to the difficulties of those Gentiles who are turning to God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}but we should write to them to abstain from food that has been polluted by being sacrificed to idols, from impurity, from eating the flesh of strangled animals, and from blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For in every town, for generations past, there have been those who preach Moses, read as he is in the synagogues every Sabbath.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}It was then decided by the apostles and the elders, with the assent of the whole church, to choose some of their number, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. Those chosen were Judas (called Barsabas) and Silas, who were leaders among the community.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They were bearers of the following letter \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*The apostles, and the followers who are the church elders, send their greetings to the followers of the Lord of Gentile birth in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}As we had heard that some of our number had upset you by their assertions, and unsettled your minds \uc1\u8211* without instructions from us \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}We met and decided to choose certain men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}We are accordingly sending Judas and Silas, and they will tell you by word of mouth what we are now writing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}We have, therefore, decided, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, to lay no further burden on you beyond these necessary conditions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}That you abstain from food offered to idols, from blood, from eating the flesh of strangled animals, and from impurity. If you guard yourselves against such things, it will be well with you. Farewell.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}So the bearers of this letter were sent on their way, and went down to Antioch. There they called a meeting of all the followers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and delivered the letter, the reading of which caused great rejoicing by its encouraging contents.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, further encouraged the them by many an address, and strengthened their faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}After some stay, they were dismissed with kind farewells from the followers, and returned to those who had sent them.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}  Some later manuscripts add: But Silas decided to stay. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Paul and Barnabas, however, remained in Antioch, where they taught and, with the help of many others, told the good news of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Some time after this, Paul said to Barnabas, \uc1\u8220*Let us go back and visit the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers in every town in which we have told the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message, and see how they are prospering.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Barnabas wished to take with them John, whose other name was Mark;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}but Paul felt that they ought not to take with them the man who had deserted them in Pamphylia, and had not gone on with them to their work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}This caused such unpleasant feeling between them that they parted ways, Barnabas taking Mark and sailing for Cyprus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}while Paul chose Silas for his companion and, after he had been committed by the followers to the gracious care of the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}started on his journey and went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches in the faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Among other places Paul went to Derbe and Lystra. At the latter place they found a disciple, named Timothy, whose mother was a Jewish woman who was a believer, while his father was a Greek,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and who was well spoken of by the followers of the Lord in Lystra and Iconium.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Wishing to take this man with him on his journey, Paul caused him to be circumcised out of consideration for the Jews in that region, for they all knew that his father had been a Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}As they traveled from town to town, they gave the followers the decisions which had been reached by the apostles and church elders at Jerusalem, for them to observe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the churches grew stronger in the faith, and increased in numbers from day to day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They next went through the Phrygian district of Galatia, but were restrained by the Holy Spirit from delivering the message in Roman Asia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When they reached the borders of Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Passing through Mysia, they went down to Troas;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and there one night Paul saw a vision. A Macedonian was standing and appealing to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Come over to Macedonia and help us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So, immediately after Paul had seen the vision, we looked for an opportunity to cross over to Macedonia, concluding that God had summoned us to tell the good news to the people there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Accordingly we set sail from Troas, and ran before the wind to Samothrace, reaching Neapolis the next day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}From there we made our way to Philippi, which is the principal city of that part of Macedonia, and also a Roman Settlement.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
In that city we spent several days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On the Sabbath we went outside the gate to the riverside, where we supposed there would be a place of prayer; and we sat down and talked to the women who were gathered there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Among them was a woman, named Lydia, belonging to Thyatira, a dealer in purple cloth, who was accustomed to join in the worship of God. The Lord touched this woman\uc1\u8217*s heart, so that she gave attention to the message delivered by Paul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and, when she and her household had been baptized, she urged us to become her guests.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Since you have shown your conviction,\uc1\u8221* she said, \uc1\u8220*that I really am a believer in the Lord, come and stay in my house.\uc1\u8221* And she insisted on our doing so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}One day, as we were on our way to the place of prayer, we were met by a girl possessed by a divining spirit, who made large profits for her masters by fortune-telling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This girl followed Paul and the rest of us, calling, \uc1\u8220*These men are servants of the most high God, and they are bringing you news of a way to salvation.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}She had been doing this for several days, when Paul, much vexed, turned and said to the spirit within her, \uc1\u8220*In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to leave her.\uc1\u8221* That very moment the spirit left her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When her masters saw that there was no hope of further profit from her, they seized Paul and Silas, dragged them into the public square to the authorities,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and took them before the Magistrates.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*These men are causing a great disturbance in our town,\uc1\u8221* they complained;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*They are Jews, and they are teaching customs which it is not right for us, as Romans, to sanction or adopt.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The mob rose as one person against them, and the Magistrates stripped them of their clothing and ordered them to be beaten with rods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After beating them severely, the Magistrates put them in prison, with orders to the jailer to keep them in safe custody.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}On receiving so strict an order, the Governor put them into the inner cell, and secured their feet in the stocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}About midnight, while Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and while the prisoners were listening to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}suddenly there was an earthquake of such violence that the jail was shaken to its foundations; all the doors flew open, and all the prisoners\uc1\u8217* chains were loosened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Roused from his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, the Governor drew his sword intending to kill himself, in the belief that the prisoners had escaped.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But Paul called our loudly, \uc1\u8220*Do not harm yourself; we are all here.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Calling for a light, the Governor rushed in, and flung himself trembling at the feet of Paul and Silas.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then he led them out, and said, \uc1\u8220*What must I do to be saved?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*Believe in Jesus, our Lord,\uc1\u8221* they replied, \uc1\u8220*and you will be saved, you and your household too.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Then they spoke to him of God\uc1\u8217*s message, and to all his household as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And that very hour of the night he took them and washed their wounds, and he himself and everyone belonging to him were baptized without delay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Afterward he took them up to his house and set before them something to eat, rejoicing that he, with all his household, had come to believe in God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}In the morning the Magistrates sent the guards with an order for the men to be discharged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The jailer told Paul of his instructions. \uc1\u8220*The Magistrates have sent an order for your discharge,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*so you had better leave the place at once and go quietly away.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Paul\uc1\u8217*s answer to them was, \uc1\u8220*They have flogged us in public without trial, though we are Roman citizens, and they have put us in prison, and now they are for sending us out secretly! No, indeed! Let them come and take us out themselves.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The guards reported his words to the Magistrates, who, on hearing that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, were alarmed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and went to the prison, and did their best to conciliate them. Then they took them out, and begged them to leave the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}When Paul and Silas left the prison, they went to Lydia\uc1\u8217*s house, and, after they had seen the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, and encouraged them, they left the place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}After passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, Paul and Silas came to Thessalonica. Here the Jews had a synagogue;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, following his usual custom, Paul joined them, and for three Sabbaths addressed them, drawing his arguments from the scriptures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He laid before them and explained that the Christ must undergo suffering and rise from the dead; and \uc1\u8220*It is this man,\uc1\u8221* he declared, \uc1\u8220*who is the Christ \uc1\u8211* this Jesus about whom I am telling you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Some of the people were convinced, and threw in their lot with Paul and Silas, as did also a large body of Greeks who were accustomed to join in the Jewish services, and a great number of leading women.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But the Jewish leaders, becoming jealous, engaged some worthless fellows from the streets, and, getting a mob together, kept the city in an uproar. They attacked Jason\uc1\u8217*s house, with the intention of bringing Paul and Silas before the Popular Assembly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, not finding them there, they proceeded to drag Jason and some of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers before the city magistrates, shouting out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*These men, who have turned the world upside down, have now come here,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and have been harbored by Jason! They are all defying the decrees of the Emperor. They say that someone else is king \uc1\u8211* a man called Jesus!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On hearing this, the people and the city magistrates were much concerned;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and, before letting them go, they took bail from Jason and the others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}That very night the followers sent Paul and Silas off to Beroea; and on reaching that place, they went to the Jewish synagogue.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}These Jews of Beroea were better disposed than those in Thessalonica, for they welcomed the message with great readiness, and daily examined the scriptures to see if what was said was true.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As a consequence, many of them became believers in Christ, besides a considerable number of Greek women of position, and of men also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But, when the Jewish leaders in Thessalonica found out that God\uc1\u8217*s message had been delivered by Paul at Beroea, they came there too, exciting and disturbing the minds of the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The followers immediately arranged for Paul to go away to the coast, but both Silas and Timothy stayed behind in Beroea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The friends who escorted Paul took him as far as Athens, and, after receiving a message for Silas and Timothy to join him as quickly as possible, they started on their return.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}While Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his heart was stirred at seeing the whole city full of idols.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So he argued in the synagogue with the Jews and with those who joined in their worship, as well as daily in the public Square with those who happened to be there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Among others, some Epicurean and Stoic Philosophers joined issue with him. Some asked \uc1\u8220*What is this prater wanting to make out?\uc1\u8221*, while others said \uc1\u8220*He seems to be a preacher of foreign Deities.\uc1\u8221* (This was because he was telling the good news about Jesus and the resurrection).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So they laid hold of him and took him to the Court of Areopagus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*May we hear,\uc1\u8221* they asked, \uc1\u8220*what new teaching this is which you are giving?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For you are bringing some strange things to our notice, and we should like to know what they mean.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}(All Athenians and the foreigners staying in the city found no time for anything else but telling, or listening to, the last new thing.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Paul took his stand in the middle of the Court, and said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*People of Athens, on every hand I see signs of your being very devout.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For as I was going about, looking at your sacred shrines, I came upon an altar with this inscription \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*To an Unknown God.\uc1\u8217* What, therefore, you worship in ignorance, that I am now proclaiming to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The God who made the world and all things that are in it \uc1\u8211* he, Lord as he is of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by hands,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}neither do human hands minister to his wants, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives, to all, life, and breath, and all things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He made all races of the earth\uc1\u8217*s surface \uc1\u8211* fixing a time for their rise and fall, and the limits of their settlements \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}That they might search for God, if by any means they might feel their way to him and find him. And yet he is not really far from any one of us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}for in him we live and move and are. To use the words of some of your own poets \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*His offspring, too, are we.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Therefore, as the offspring of God, we must not think that the Deity has any resemblance to anything made of gold, or silver, or stone \uc1\u8211* a work of human art and imagination.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}True, God looked with indulgence on the days of people\uc1\u8217*s ignorance, but now he is announcing to everyone everywhere the need for repentance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}because he has fixed a day on which he intends to judge the world with justice, by a man whom he has appointed \uc1\u8211* and of this he has given all people a pledge by raising this man from the dead.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}On hearing of a resurrection of the dead, some began jeering, but others said that they wanted to hear what he had to say about that another time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And so Paul left the Court.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}There were, however, some people who joined him, and became believers in Christ. Among them were Dionysius, a member of the Court of Areopagus, a woman named Damaris, and several others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}On leaving Athens, Paul next went to Corinth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There he met a Jew of the name of Aquila, from Pontus, who, with his wife Priscilla, had lately come from Italy, in consequence of the order which had been issued by the Emperor Claudius for all Jews to leave Rome. Paul paid them a visit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and, since their trade was the same as his, he stayed and worked with them \uc1\u8211* their trade was tent-making.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Every Sabbath Paul gave addresses in the synagogue, trying to convince both Jews and Greeks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But, when Silas and Timothy had come down from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself entirely to delivering the message, earnestly maintaining before the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}However, as they set themselves against him and became abusive, Paul shook his clothes in protest and said to them, \uc1\u8220*Your blood be on your own heads. My conscience is clear. From this time forward I will go to the Gentiles.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he left, and went to the house of a certain Titius Justus, who had been accustomed to join in the worship of God, and whose house was next door to the synagogue.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Crispus, the synagogue leader, came to believe in the Lord, and so did all his household; and many of the Corinthians, as they listened to Paul, became believers in Christ and were baptized.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}One night the Lord said to Paul, in a vision, \uc1\u8220*Have no fear, but continue to speak, and refuse to be silenced;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for I am with you, and no one will do you harm, for I have many people in this city.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So he settled there for a year and a half, and taught God\uc1\u8217*s message among the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}While Gallio was governor of Greece, some of the Jewish leaders made a combined attack on Paul, and brought him before the Governor\uc1\u8217*s Bench,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}charging him with persuading people to worship God in a way forbidden by the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Just as Paul was on the point of speaking, Gallio said to them, \uc1\u8220*If this were a case of misdemeanor or some serious crime, there would be some reason for my listening patiently to you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but, since it is a dispute about words, and names, and your own Law, you must see to it yourselves. I do not choose to be a judge in such matters.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Saying this, he drove them back from the Bench.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then they all set on Sosthenes, the synagogue leader, and beat him in front of the Bench, but Gallio did not trouble himself about any of these things.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Paul remained there some time after this, and then took leave of the followers, and sailed to Syria with Priscilla and Aquila, but not before his head had been shaved at Cenchreae, because he was under a vow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They put into Ephesus, and there Paul, leaving his companions, went into the synagogue and addressed the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When they asked him to prolong his stay, he declined, saying however,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}as he took his leave, \uc1\u8220*I will come back again to you, please God,\uc1\u8221* and then set sail from Ephesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}On reaching Caesarea, he went up to Jerusalem and exchanged greetings with the church, and then went down to Antioch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After making some stay in Antioch, he set out on a tour through the Phrygian district of Galatia, strengthening the faith of all the disciples as he went.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Meanwhile there had come to Ephesus an Alexandrian Jew, named Apollos, an eloquent man, who was well-versed in the scriptures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He had been well-instructed in the Way of the Lord, and with burning zeal he spoke of, and taught carefully, the facts about Jesus, though he knew of no baptism but John\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}This man began to speak out fearlessly in the synagogue; and when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him home and explained the Way of God to him more carefully still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}When he wanted to cross to Greece, the followers furthered his plans, and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. On his arrival he proved of great assistance to those who had, through the loving kindness of God, become believers in Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}for he vigorously confuted the Jews, publicly proving by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul passed through the inland districts of Roman Asia, and went to Ephesus. There he found some disciples, of whom he asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Did you, when you became believers in Christ, receive the Holy Spirit?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*No,\uc1\u8221* they answered, \uc1\u8220*we did not even hear that there was a Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*What then was your baptism?\uc1\u8221* Paul asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*John\uc1\u8217*s baptism was a baptism on repentance,\uc1\u8221* rejoined Paul, \uc1\u8220*and John told the people (speaking of the \uc1\u8216*one coming\uc1\u8217* after him) that they should believe in him \uc1\u8211* that is in Jesus.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, after Paul had placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit descended on them, and they began to speak in other languages and to preach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}There were about twelve of them in all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Paul went to the synagogue there, and for three months spoke out fearlessly, giving addresses and trying to convince his hearers, about the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Some of them, however, hardened their hearts and refused to believe, denouncing the Way before the people. So Paul left them and withdrew his disciples, and gave daily addresses in the lecture-hall of Tyrannus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This went on for two years, so that all who lived in Roman Asia, Jews and Greeks alike, heard the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}God did miracles of no ordinary kind by Paul\uc1\u8217*s hands;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so that people would carry home to the sick handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his body, and their diseases would leave them and the wicked spirits go out of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}An attempt was made by some itinerant Jews, who were exorcists, to use the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had wicked spirits in them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*I order you,\uc1\u8221* they would say, \uc1\u8220*by the Jesus, whom Paul preaches.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but the wicked spirit answered them, \uc1\u8220*Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but you \uc1\u8211* who are you?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then the man, in whom this wicked spirit was, sprang on them, mastered both of them, and so completely overpowered them, that they fled out of the house, stripped of their clothes, and wounded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This incident came to the knowledge of all the Jews and Greeks living at Ephesus; they were all awe-struck, and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in the highest honor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Many, too, of those who had become believers in Christ came with a full confession of their practices;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}while a number of people, who had practiced magic, collected their books and burnt them publicly; and on reckoning up the price of these, they found it amounted to fifty thousand silver coins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So irresistibly did the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message spread and prevail.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Sometime after these events Paul resolved to go through Macedonia and Greece, and then make his way to Jerusalem. \uc1\u8220*And after I have been there,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*I must visit Rome also.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So he sent to Macedonia two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, while he himself stayed for some time longer in Roman Asia.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Just about that time a great disturbance arose about the Way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}A silversmith named Demetrius, who made silver models of the shrine of Artemis, and so gave a great deal of work to the artisans,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}got these men together, as well as the workmen engaged in similar occupations, and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Men, you know that our prosperity depends on this work,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and you see and hear that not only at Ephesus, but in almost the whole of Roman Asia, this Paul has convinced and won over great numbers of people, by his assertion that those Gods which are made by hands are not Gods at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So that not only is this business of ours likely to fall into discredit, but there is the further danger that the Temple of the great Goddess Artemis will be thought nothing of, and that she herself will be deprived of her splendor \uc1\u8211* though all Roman Asia and the whole world worship her.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When they heard this, the men were greatly enraged, and began shouting \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The commotion spread through the whole city, and the people rushed together into the amphitheater, dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus, two Macedonians who were Paul\uc1\u8217*s traveling companions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Paul wished to go into the amphitheater and face the people, but the disciples would not let him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}while some of the chief religious officials of the province, who were friendly to him, sent repeated entreaties to him not to trust himself inside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Meanwhile some were shouting one thing and some another, for the Assembly was all in confusion, most of those present not even knowing why they had met.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But some of the crowd prompted Alexander, whom several of the Jewish leaders had pushed to the front, and he waved his hand to show that he wanted to speak in their defense to the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}However, when they recognized him as a Jew, one cry broke from them all, and they continued shouting for two hours \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When the Recorder had succeeded in quieting the crowd, he said, \uc1\u8220*People of Ephesus, who is there, I ask you, who needs to be told that this city of Ephesus is the Warden of the Temple of the great Artemis, and of the statue which fell down from Zeus?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}As these are undeniable facts, you ought to keep calm and do nothing rash;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}for you have brought these men here, though they are neither robbers of Temples nor blasphemers of our Goddess.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}If, however, Demetrius and the artisans who are acting with him have a charge to make against anyone, there are court days and there are Magistrates; let both parties take legal proceedings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But if you want anything more, it will have to be settled in the regular Assembly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For I tell you that we are in danger of being proceeded against for today\uc1\u8217*s riot, there being nothing to account for it; and in that case we will be at a loss to give any reason for this disorderly gathering.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}With these words he dismissed the Assembly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}When the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, and, with encouraging words, bade them goodbye, and started on his journey to Macedonia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}After going through those districts and speaking many encouraging words to the disciples, he went into Greece, where he stayed three months.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He was about to sail to Syria, when he learned that a plot had been laid against him by several of the Jewish leaders; so he decided to return by way of Macedonia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He was accompanied by Sopater the son of Pyrrhus, of Beroea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, as well as by Tychicus and Trophimus of Roman Asia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}These people went to Troas and waited for us there;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}while we ourselves sailed from Philippi after the Passover, and joined them five days later at Troas, where we stayed for a week.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On the first day of the week, when we had met for the breaking of bread, Paul, who was intending to leave the next day, began to address those who were present, and prolonged his address until midnight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}There were a good many lamps in the upstairs room, where we had met;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and a young man named Eutychus, sitting at the window, was gradually overcome with great drowsiness, as Paul continued his address. At last, quite overpowered by his drowsiness, he fell from the third story to the ground, and was picked up for dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Paul went down, threw himself on him, and put his arms around him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Do not be alarmed,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*he is still alive.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then he went upstairs; and, after breaking and partaking of the bread, he talked with them at great length until daybreak, and then left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Meanwhile they had taken the lad away alive, and were greatly comforted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}We started first, went on board ship, and sailed for Assos, intending to take Paul on board there. This was by his own arrangement, as he intended to go by land himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and went on to Mitylene.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The day after we had sailed from there, we arrived off Chios, touched at Samos the following day, and the next day reached Miletus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}for Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus, so as to avoid spending much time in Roman Asia. He was making haste to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the Festival at the close of the Harvest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}From Miletus, however, he sent to Ephesus and invited the church elders to meet him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and, when they came, he said to them, \uc1\u8220*You know well the life that I always led among you from the very first day that I set foot in Roman Asia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}serving the Lord, as I did, in all humility, amid the tears and trials which fell to my lot through the plots of some of the Jewish leaders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I never shrank from telling you anything that could be helpful to you, or from teaching you both in public and in private.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I earnestly pointed both Jews and Greeks to the repentance that leads to God, and to faith in Jesus, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And now, under spiritual constraint, I am here on my way to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}except that in town after town the Holy Spirit plainly declares to me that imprisonment and troubles await me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But I count my life of no value to myself, if only I may complete the course marked out for me, and the task that was allotted me by the Lord Jesus \uc1\u8211* which was to declare the good news of the love of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And now, I tell you, I know that none of you will ever see my face again \uc1\u8211* you among whom I have gone about proclaiming the kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Therefore I declare to you this day, that my conscience is clear in regard to the fate of any of you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}for I have not shrunk from announcing the whole purpose of God regarding you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Be watchful over yourselves, and over the whole flock, of which the Holy Spirit has placed you in charge, to shepherd the church of God, which he won for himself at the cost of his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I know that, after my departure, merciless wolves will get in among you, who will not spare the flock;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and from among yourselves, too, people will arise, who will teach perversions of truth, so as to draw away the disciples after them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Therefore, be on your guard, remembering how for three years, night and day, I never ceased, even with tears, to warn each one of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And now I commend you to the Lord and to the message of his love \uc1\u8211* a message which has the power to build up your characters, and to give you your place among all those who have become Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I have never coveted anyone\uc1\u8217*s gold or silver or clothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}You, yourselves, know that these hands of mine provided not only for my own wants, but for my companions also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}I left nothing undone to show you that, laboring as I labored, you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said himself \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*It is more blessed to give than to receive.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}When Paul had finished speaking, he knelt down and prayed with them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}All were in tears; and throwing their arms around Paul\uc1\u8217*s neck, they kissed him again and again,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}grieving most of all over what he had said \uc1\u8211* that they would never see his face again. Then they escorted him to the ship.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}When we had torn ourselves away and had set sail, we ran before the wind to Cos; the next day we came to Rhodes, and from there to Patara,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}where we found a ship crossing to Phoenicia, and went on board and set sail.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}After sighting Cyprus and leaving it on the left, we sailed to Syria, and put into Tyre, where the ship was to discharge her cargo.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}There we found the disciples and stayed a week with them. Speaking under the influence of the Spirit, they warned Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}However, when we had come to the end of our visit, we went on our way, all the disciples with their wives and children escorting us out of the city. We knelt down on the beach, and prayed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and then said goodbye to one another; after which we went on board, and they returned home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After we had made the run from Tyre, we landed at Ptolemais, and exchanged greetings with the followers there, and spent a day with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The next day we left, and reached Caesarea, where we went to the house of Philip, the missionary, who was one of the Seven, and stayed with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He had four unmarried daughters, who had the gift of prophecy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}During our visit, which lasted several days, a prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He came to see us, and, taking Paul\uc1\u8217*s belt, and binding his own feet and hands with it, said, \uc1\u8220*This is what the Holy Spirit says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The man to whom this belt belongs will be bound like this by the religious authorities in Jerusalem, and they will give him up to the Gentiles\uc1\u8217*.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When we heard that, we and the people of the place began to entreat Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It was then that Paul made the reply, \uc1\u8220*Why are you weeping and breaking my heart like this? For my part, I am ready not only to be bound, but even to suffer death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, as he would not be persuaded, we said no more to him, only adding \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The Lord\uc1\u8217*s will be done.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}At the end of our visit, we made our preparations, and started on our way up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, and brought Mnason with them, a Cypriot disciple of long standing, with whom we were to stay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}On our arrival at Jerusalem, the followers of the Lord there gave us a hearty welcome;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and the next day Paul went with us to see James, and all the church elders were present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After greeting them, Paul related in detail all that God had done among the Gentiles through his efforts;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and, when they had heard it, they began praising God, and said to Paul:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*You see, brother, that those of our people who have become believers in Christ may be numbered by tens of thousands, and they are all naturally earnest in upholding the Jewish Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Now they have heard it said about you, that you teach all of our people in foreign countries to forsake Moses, for you tell them not to circumcise their children or even to observe Jewish customs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Well now, as they are certain to hear of your arrival, do what we are going to suggest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}We have four men here, who have of their own accord put themselves under a vow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Join these men, share their purification, and bear their expenses, so that they may shave their heads; and then all will see that there is no truth in what they have been told about you, but that, on the contrary, you yourself rule your life in obedience to the Jewish Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}As to the Gentiles who have become believers in Christ, we have sent our decision that they should avoid food offered to idols, and blood, and the flesh of strangled animals, and impurity.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Paul joined the men, and the next day shared their purification, and went into the Temple, and gave notice of the expiration of the period of purification when the usual offering should have been made on behalf of each of them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But, just as the seven days were drawing to a close, some of the Jewish people from Roman Asia caught sight of Paul in the Temple, and caused great excitement among all the people present, by seizing Paul and shouting,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*People of Israel! Help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people, our Law, and this place; and, what is more, he has actually brought Greeks into the Temple and defiled this sacred place.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}(For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in Paul\uc1\u8217*s company in the city, and were under the belief that Paul had taken him into the Temple.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The whole city was stirred, and the people quickly collected, seized Paul, and dragged him out of the Temple, when the doors were immediately shut.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}They were bent on killing him, when it was reported to the officer commanding the garrison, that all Jerusalem was in commotion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He instantly got together some officers and soldiers, and charged down on the crowd, who, when they saw the commanding officer and his soldiers, stopped beating Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then he went up to Paul, arrested him, ordered him to be doubly chained, and proceeded to inquire who he was, and what he had been doing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Some of the crowd said one thing, and some another; and, as he could get no definite reply because of the uproar, he ordered Paul to be taken into the barracks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When Paul reached the steps, he was actually being carried by the soldiers, owing to the violence of the mob;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}for the people were following in a mass, shouting out, \uc1\u8220*Kill him!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Just as he was about to be taken into the Fort, Paul said to the commanding officer, \uc1\u8220*May I speak to you?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Do you know Greek?\uc1\u8221* asked the commanding officer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8220*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you, then, the Egyptian who some time ago raised an insurrection and led the four thousand Bandits out into the wilderness?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8220*No,\uc1\u8221* said Paul, \uc1\u8220*I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of a city of some note. I beg you to give me permission to speak to the people.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}The commanding officer gave his permission, and Paul, standing on the steps, made signs with his hand to the people, and, when comparative silence had been obtained, he said to them in Hebrew:{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}\uc1\u8220*Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I am about to make.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When they heard that he was speaking to them in Hebrew, they were still more quiet; and Paul went on:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, but I was brought up in this city under the teaching of Gamaliel, and educated in accordance with the strict system of our ancestral Law. I was as zealous in God\uc1\u8217*s service as any of you who are here today.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In my persecution of this Way I did not stop even at the taking of life. I put in chains, and imprisoned, men and women alike \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And to that the high priest himself and all the council of elders can testify. For I had letters of introduction from them to our fellow Jews at Damascus, and I was on my way to that place, to bring those whom I might find there prisoners to Jerusalem for punishment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}While I was still on my way, just as I was getting close to Damascus, about midday, suddenly there flashed from the heavens a great light all around me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me \uc1\u8216*Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Who are you, Lord?\uc1\u8217* I replied. Then the voice said \uc1\u8216*I am Jesus of Nazareth whom you are persecuting.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The men with me saw the light, but did not hear the speaker\uc1\u8217*s voice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then I said \uc1\u8216*What am I to do, Lord?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*Get up and go into Damascus,\uc1\u8217* The Lord said to me, \uc1\u8216*and there you will be told all that you have been appointed to do.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In consequence of that dazzling light I could not see, but my companions held me by the hand, until I reached Damascus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}There a man named Ananias, a strict observer of our Law, well spoken of by all the Jewish inhabitants, came to see me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Standing close to me, he said \uc1\u8216*Saul, my brother, recover your sight.\uc1\u8217* And then and there I recovered my sight and looked up at him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he said \uc1\u8216*The God of our ancestors has appointed you to learn his will, and to see the righteous one, and to hear words from his lips;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for you will be a witness for him to all the world of what you have just seen and heard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And now why wait any longer, Be baptized at once, wash away your sins, and invoke his name.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}After my return to Jerusalem, while I was praying one day in the Temple, I fell into a trance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and saw Jesus saying to me \uc1\u8216*Make haste and leave Jerusalem at once, because they will not accept your testimony about me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Lord,\uc1\u8217* I answered, \uc1\u8216*these people know that I used to imprison and scourge, in synagogue after synagogue, those who believed in you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and, when the blood of your martyr, Stephen, was being shed, I was myself standing by, approving of his death, and took charge of the clothes of those who were murdering him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But Jesus said to me \uc1\u8216*Go; for I will send you to the Gentiles far away\uc1\u8217*.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Up to this point the people had been listening to Paul, but at these words they called out, \uc1\u8220*Kill him! A fellow like this ought not to have been allowed to live!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}As they were shouting, tearing off their clothes, and throwing dust in the air,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}the commanding officer ordered Paul to be taken into the Fort, and directed that he should be examined under the lash so that he might find out the reason for their outcry against him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But just as they had tied him up to be scourged, Paul said to the centurion standing near, \uc1\u8220*Is it legal for you to scourge a Roman citizen, unconvicted?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}On hearing this, the centurion went and reported it to the commanding officer. \uc1\u8220*Do you know what you are doing?\uc1\u8221* he said. \uc1\u8220*This man is a Roman citizen.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So the commanding officer went up to Paul and said, \uc1\u8220*Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*Yes,\uc1\u8221* replied Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*I had to pay a heavy price for my position as citizen,\uc1\u8221* said the officer. \uc1\u8220*I am one by birth,\uc1\u8221* rejoined Paul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The men who were to have examined Paul immediately drew back, and the officer, finding that Paul was a Roman citizen, was alarmed at having put him in chains.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}On the next day the commanding officer, wishing to find out the real reason why Paul was denounced by the Jewish leaders, had his chains taken off, and directed the chief priests and the whole of the High Council to assemble, and then took Paul down and brought him before them.{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Paul fixed his eyes on the Council, and began:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Brothers, for my part, I have always ordered my life before God, with a clear conscience, up to this very day.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}At this, the high priest Ananias ordered the men standing near to strike him on the mouth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Paul turned to him and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Are you sitting there to try me in accordance with law, and yet, in defiance of law, order me to be struck?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The people standing near said to Paul, \uc1\u8220*Do you know that you are insulting God\uc1\u8217*s high priest?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*I did not know, brothers, that it was the high priest,\uc1\u8221* said Paul, \uc1\u8220*for scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Of the ruler of your people you should speak no ill\uc1\u8217*.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Noticing that some of those present were Sadducees and others Pharisees, Paul called out in the Council, \uc1\u8220*Brothers, I am a Pharisee and a son of Pharisees. It is on the question of hope for the dead and of their resurrection that I am on my trial.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As soon as he said this, a dispute arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees; and there was a sharp division of opinion among those present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}(For Sadducees say there is no such thing as a resurrection, and that there is neither angel nor spirit, while Pharisees believe in both.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So a great uproar ensued, and some of the Teachers of the Law belonging to the Pharisees\uc1\u8217* party stood up and hotly protested, \uc1\u8220*We find nothing whatever wrong in this man. Suppose a spirit did speak to him, or an angel\uc1\u8230*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The dispute was becoming so violent, that the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces between them, ordered the Guard to go down and rescue him from them, and take him into the Fort.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}That night the Lord came and stood by Paul, and said, \uc1\u8220*Courage! You have borne witness for me in Jerusalem and you must bear witness in Rome also.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In the morning some Jewish men combined together, and took an oath that they would not eat or drink until they had killed Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There were more than forty in the plot;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and they went to the chief priests and the elders, and said, \uc1\u8220*We have taken a solemn oath not to touch food until we have killed Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So we want you now, with the consent of the Council, to suggest to the commanding officer that he should bring Paul down before you, as though you intended to go more fully into his case; but, before he comes here, we will be ready to make away with him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}However, the son of Paul\uc1\u8217*s sister, hearing of the plot, went to the Fort, and on being admitted, told Paul about it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Paul called one of the garrison centurion and asked him to take the lad to the commanding officer, as he had something to tell him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The centurion went with the lad to the commanding officer, and said, \uc1\u8220*The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this lad to you, as he has something to tell you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The commanding officer took the lad by the hand, and, stepping aside, asked what it was he had to tell him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*Some men have agreed,\uc1\u8221* answered the lad, \uc1\u8220*to ask you to bring Paul down before the Council tomorrow, on the plea of your making further inquiry into his case.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But do not let them persuade you, for more than forty of them are lying in wait for him, who have taken an oath that they will not eat or drink, until they have made away with him; and they are at this very moment in readiness, counting on your promise.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The commanding officer then dismissed the lad, cautioning him not to mention to anybody that he had given him that information.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then he called two Captains, and ordered them to have two hundred soldiers ready to go to Caesarea, as well as seventy troopers and two hundred lancers, by nine o\uc1\u8217*clock that night,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and to have horses ready for Paul to ride, so that they might take him safely to Felix, the Governor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He also wrote a letter along these lines:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*Claudius Lysias sends his compliments to His Excellency Felix the Governor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The man whom I send with this had been seized by some Jews, and was on the point of being killed by them, when I came upon them with the force under my command, and rescued him, as I learned that he was a Roman citizen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Wanting to know exactly the ground of the charges they made against him, I brought him before their Council,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}when I found that their charges were connected with questions of their own Law, and that there was nothing alleged involving either death or imprisonment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Having, however, information of a plot against the man, which was about to be put into execution, I am sending him to you at once, and I have also directed his accusers to prosecute him before you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The soldiers, in accordance with their orders, took charge of Paul and conducted him by night to Antipatris;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and on the next day, leaving the troopers to go on with him, they returned to the Fort.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}On arriving at Caesarea, the troopers delivered the letter to the Governor, and brought Paul before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}As soon as Felix had read the letter, he enquired to what province Paul belonged, and, learning that he came from Cilicia, he said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8220*I will hear all you have to say as soon as your accusers have arrived.\uc1\u8221* And he ordered Paul to be kept under guard in Herod\uc1\u8217*s Government house.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}Five days afterward the high priest Ananias came down with some of the elders and a barrister named Tertullus. They laid an information with the Governor against Paul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, when the hearing came on, Tertullus began his speech for the prosecution.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*We owe it to your Excellency,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*that we are enjoying profound peace, and we owe it to your foresight that this nation is constantly securing reforms \uc1\u8211* advantages which we very gratefully accept at all times and places.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But \uc1\u8211* not to be tedious \uc1\u8211* I beg you, with your accustomed fairness, to listen to a brief statement of our case.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}We have found this man a public pest; he is one who stirs up disputes among our people all the world over, and is a ringleader of the Nazarene heretics.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He even attempted to desecrate the Temple itself, but we caught him;{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}  Some later manuscripts add: We wanted to judge him according to our law. But Lysias the commanding officer came and took him out of our hands by force, ordering his accusers to come before you. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and you will be able, by examining him on all these points, to satisfy yourself as to the charges which we are bringing against him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The Jewish crowd also joined in the attack and bore out his statements.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On a sign from the Governor, Paul made this reply:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*Knowing, as I do, for how many years you have acted as judge to this nation, it is with confidence that I undertake my own defense.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For you can easily verify that it is not more than twelve days ago that I went up to worship at Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}where my prosecutors never found me holding discussions with anyone, or causing a crowd to collect \uc1\u8211* either in the Temple, or in the synagogues, or about the city;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and they cannot establish the charges which they are now making against me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This, however, I do acknowledge to you, that it is as a believer in the Way which they call heretical, that I worship the God of my ancestors. At the same time, I believe everything that is in accordance with the Law and that is written in the prophets;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and I have a hope that rests in God \uc1\u8211* a hope which they also cherish \uc1\u8211* that there will one day be a resurrection of good and bad alike.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This being so, I strive at all times to keep my conscience clear before both God and people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}After some years\uc1\u8217* absence I had come to bring charitable gifts to my nation, and to make offerings;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and it was while engaged in this that they found me in the Temple, after completing a period of purification, but not with any crowd or disorder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There were, however, some Jews from Roman Asia who ought to have been here before you, and to have made any charge that they may have against me \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Or else let my opponents here say what they found wrong in me when I was before the Council,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}except as to the one sentence that I shouted out as I stood among them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*It is about the resurrection of the dead that I am on my trial before you today\uc1\u8217*.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Felix, however, adjourned the case \uc1\u8211* though he had a fairly accurate knowledge of all that concerned the Way \uc1\u8211* with the promise, \uc1\u8220*When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will give my decision in your case.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So he gave orders to the centurion in charge of Paul to keep him in custody, but to relax the regulations, and not to prevent any of his personal friends from attending to his wants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Some days later Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, and, sending for Paul, listened to what he had to say about faith in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But, while Paul was speaking at length about righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became terrified, and interrupted him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Go for the present, but, when I find an opportunity, I will send for you again.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He was hoping, too, for a bribe from Paul, and so he used to send for him frequently and talk with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But, after the lapse of two years, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and, wishing to gain popularity with the Jewish leaders, he left Paul a prisoner.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}Three days after Festus had arrived in his province, he left Caesarea and went up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There the chief priests and the leading men among the Jews laid an information before him against Paul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and asked a favor of him, to Paul\uc1\u8217*s injury \uc1\u8211* to have Paul brought to Jerusalem. All the while they were plotting to make away with him on the road.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But Festus answered that Paul was in prison at Caesarea, and that he himself would be leaving for that place shortly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*So let the influential men among you,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*go down with me, and if there is anything amiss in the man, charge him formally with it.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After staying among them some eight or ten days, Festus went down to Caesarea. The next day he took his seat on the Bench, and ordered Paul to be brought before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On Paul\uc1\u8217*s appearance, the Jewish leaders who had come down from Jerusalem surrounded him, and made many serious charges, which they failed to establish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Paul\uc1\u8217*s answer to the charge was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I have not committed any offense against the Jewish Law, or the Temple, or the Emperor.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But, as Festus wished to gain popularity with the Jews, he interrupted Paul with the question, \uc1\u8220*Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be tried on these charges before me there?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*No,\uc1\u8221* replied Paul, \uc1\u8220*I am standing at the Emperor\uc1\u8217*s court, where I ought to be tried. I have not wronged the Jews, as you yourself are well aware.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If, however, I am breaking the law and have committed any offense deserving death, I do not ask to escape the penalty; but, if there is nothing in the accusations of these people, no one has the power to give me up to them. I appeal to the Emperor.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Festus, after conferring with his Council, answered, \uc1\u8220*You have appealed to the Emperor; to the Emperor you will go.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Some days later King Agrippa and Bernice came down to Caesarea, and paid a visit of congratulation to Festus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and, as they were staying there for several days, Festus laid Paul\uc1\u8217*s case before the king. \uc1\u8220*There is a man here,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*left a prisoner by Felix,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}about whom, when I came to Jerusalem, the Jewish chief priest and the elders laid an information, demanding judgment against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}My answer to them was, that it was not the practice of Romans to give up anyone to their accusers until the accused had met them face to face, and had also had an opportunity of answering the charges brought against them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So they met here, and without loss of time I took my seat on the Bench the very next day, and ordered the man to be brought before me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But, when his accusers came forward, they brought no charge of wrongdoing such as I had expected;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}but I found that there were certain questions in dispute between them about their own religion, and about some dead man called Jesus, whom Paul declared to be alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And, as I was at a loss how to enquire into questions of this kind, I asked Paul if he were willing to go up to Jerusalem, and be put on trial there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Paul, however, appealed to have his case reserved for the consideration of his August Majesty, so I ordered him to be detained in custody, until I could send him to the Emperor.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8220*I should like to hear this man myself,\uc1\u8221* Agrippa said to Festus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*You will hear him tomorrow,\uc1\u8221* Festus answered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come in full state and had entered the Audience Chamber, with the superior officers and the principal people of the city, by the order of Festus Paul was brought before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then Festus said, \uc1\u8220*King Agrippa, and all here present, you see before you the man about whom the whole Jewish people have applied to me, both at Jerusalem and here, loudly asserting that he ought not to be allowed to live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I found, however, that he had not done anything deserving death; so, as he had himself appealed to his August Majesty, I decided to send him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But I have nothing definite to write about him to my Imperial Master; and for that reason I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examining him, I may have something to write.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For it seems to me absurd to send a prisoner, without at the same time stating the charges made against him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}Turning to Paul, Agrippa said, \uc1\u8220*You are at liberty to speak for yourself.\uc1\u8221* Then Paul stretched out his hand and began his defense.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*I have been congratulating myself, King Agrippa,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*that it is before you that I have to make my defense today, with regard to all the charges brought against me by my own people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}especially as you are so well-versed in all the customs and questions of the Jewish world. I beg you therefore to give me a patient hearing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My life, then, from youth upwards, was passed, from the very first, among my own nation, and in Jerusalem, and is within the knowledge of all Jews;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and they have always known \uc1\u8211* if they choose to give evidence \uc1\u8211* that, in accordance with the very strictest form of our religion, I lived a true Pharisee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Even now, it is because of my hope in the promise given by God to our ancestors that I stand here on my trial \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A promise which our twelve tribes, by earnest service night and day, hope to see fulfilled. It is for this hope, your Majesty, that I am accused \uc1\u8211* and by Jews themselves!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Why do you all hold it incredible that God should raise the dead?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I myself, it is true, once thought it my duty to oppose in every way the name of Jesus of Nazareth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and I actually did so at Jerusalem. Acting on the authority of the chief priests, I myself threw many of the people of Christ into prison, and, when it was proposed to put them to death, I gave my vote for it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Time after time, in every synagogue, I tried by punishments to force them to blaspheme. So frantic was I against them, that I pursued them even to towns beyond our borders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}It was while I was traveling to Damascus on an errand of this kind, entrusted with full powers by the chief priests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}that at midday, your Majesty, I saw right in my path, coming from the heavens, a light brighter than the glare of the sun, which shone all around me and those traveling with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We all fell to the ground, and then I heard a voice saying to me in Hebrew \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? By kicking against the goad you are punishing yourself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Who are you, Lord?\uc1\u8217* I asked. And the Lord said, \uc1\u8216*I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}but get up and stand upright; for I have appeared to you in order to appoint you a servant and a witness of those revelations of me which you have already had, and of those in which I will yet appear to you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}since I am choosing you out from your own people and from the Gentiles, to whom I now send you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; so that they may receive pardon for their sins, and a place among those who have become God\uc1\u8217*s people, by faith in me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After that, King Agrippa, I did not fail to obey the heavenly vision;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}on the contrary, first to those at Damascus and Jerusalem, and then through the whole of Judea, and to the Gentiles as well, I began to preach repentance and conversion to God, and a life befitting that repentance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}This is why some men seized me in the Temple, and made attempts on my life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}However I have received help from God to this very day, and so stand here, and bear my testimony to high and low alike \uc1\u8211* without adding a word to what the prophets, as well as Moses, declared should happen \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}That the Christ must suffer, and that, by rising from the dead, he was destined to be the first to bring news of light, not only to our nation, but also to the Gentiles.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}While Paul was making this defense, Festus called out loudly, \uc1\u8220*You are mad, Paul; your great learning is driving you mad.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8220*I am not mad, your Excellency,\uc1\u8221* he replied. \uc1\u8220*On the contrary, the statements that I am making are true and sober.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Indeed, the king knows about these matters, so I speak before him without constraint. I am sure that there is nothing whatever of what I have been telling him that has escaped his attention; for all this has not been done in a corner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But Agrippa said to Paul, \uc1\u8220*You are soon trying to make a Christian of me!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*Whether it is soon or late,\uc1\u8221* answered Paul, \uc1\u8220*I pray to God that not only you, but all who are listening to me, might today become just what I am myself \uc1\u8211* except for these chains!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then the king rose, with the Governor and Bernice and those who had been sitting with them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and, after retiring, discussed the case among themselves. \uc1\u8220*There is nothing,\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*deserving death or imprisonment in this man\uc1\u8217*s conduct\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and, speaking to Festus, Agrippa added, \uc1\u8220*The man might have been discharged, if he had not appealed to the Emperor.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 27}As it was decided that we were to sail to Italy, Paul and some other prisoners were put in charge of a centurion of the Augustan Guard, named Julius.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}We went on board a ship from Adramyttium, which was on the point of sailing to the ports along the coast of Roman Asia, and put to sea. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, went with us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The next day we put in to Sidon, where Julius treated Paul in a friendly manner, and allowed him to go to see his friends and receive their hospitality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Putting to sea again, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the wind was against us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, after crossing the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we reached Myra in Lycia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There the Roman officer found an Alexandrian ship on her way to Italy, and put us on board of her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For several days our progress was slow, and it was only with difficulty that we arrived off Cnidus. As the wind was still unfavorable when we came off Cape Salmone, we sailed under the lee of Crete,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and with difficulty, by keeping close in shore, we reached a place called \uc1\u8216*Fair Havens,\uc1\u8217* near which was the town of Lasea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This had taken a considerable time, and sailing was already dangerous, for the Fast was already over; and so Paul gave this warning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*My friends,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*I see that this voyage will be attended with injury and much damage, not only to the cargo and the ship, but to our own lives also.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The Roman officer, however, was more influenced by the captain and the owner than by what was said by Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And, as the harbor was not a suitable one to winter in, the majority were in favor of continuing the voyage, in hope of being able to reach Phoenix, and winter there. Phoenix was a Cretan harbor, open to the north-east and south-east.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So, when a light wind sprang up from the south, thinking that they had found their opportunity, they weighed anchor and kept along the coast of Crete, close in shore.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But shortly afterward a hurricane came down on us off the land \uc1\u8211* a north-easter, as it is called.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The ship was caught by it and was unable to keep her head to the wind, so we had to give way and let her drive before it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Running under the lee of a small island called Cauda, we only just managed to secure the ship\uc1\u8217*s boat,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, after hoisting it on board, the men frapped the ship. But, afraid of being driven on to the Syrtis Sands, they lowered the yard, and then drifted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So violently were we tossed about by the storm, that the next day they began throwing the cargo overboard,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and, on the following day, threw out the ship\uc1\u8217*s tackle with their own hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}As neither sun nor stars were visible for several days, and, as the gale still continued severe, all hope of our being saved was at last abandoned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It was then, when they had gone a long time without food, that Paul came forward, and said, \uc1\u8220*My friends, you should have listened to me, and not have sailed from Crete and so incurred this injury and damage.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Yet, even as things are, I beg you not to lose courage, for there will not be a single life lost among you \uc1\u8211* only the ship.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong, and whom I serve, stood by me, and said \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Have no fear, Paul; you must appear before the Emperor, and God himself has given you the lives of all your fellow voyagers.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Therefore, courage, my friends! For I believe God, that everything will happen exactly as I have been told.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}We will, however, have to be driven on some island.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}It was now the fourteenth night of the storm, and we were drifting about in the Adriatic Sea, when, about midnight, the sailors began to suspect that they were drawing near land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So they took soundings, and found twenty fathoms of water. After waiting a little, they took soundings again, and found fifteen fathoms.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then, as they were afraid of our being driven on some rocky coast, they let go four anchors from the stern, and longed for daylight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The sailors wanted to leave the ship, and had lowered the boat, on pretense of running out anchors from the bows,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}when Paul said to the Roman officer and his men, \uc1\u8220*Unless the sailors remain on board, you cannot be saved.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So the soldiers cut the ropes which held the boat, and let her drift away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}In the interval before daybreak Paul kept urging them all to take something to eat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*It is a fortnight today,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*that, owing to your anxiety, you have gone without food, taking nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}So I beg you to take something to eat; your safety depends on it, for not one of you will lose even a hair of his head.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}With these words he took some bread, and, after saying the thanksgiving to God before them all, broke it in pieces, and began to eat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}and the men all felt cheered and had something to eat themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}There were about seventy-six of us on board, all told.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}After satisfying their hunger, they further lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}When daylight came, they could not make out what land it was, but, observing a creek in which there was a beach, they consulted as to whether they could run the ship safely into it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then they cast off, and abandoned the anchors, and at the same time unlashed the gear of the steering oars, hoisted the foresail to the wind, and made for the beach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}They got, however, into a kind of channel, and there ran the ship aground. The bows stuck fast and could not be moved, while the stern began breaking up under the strain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The advice of the soldiers was that the prisoners should be killed, so that none of them could swim away and make their escape.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}But the Roman officer, anxious to save Paul, prevented their carrying out their intention, and ordered that those who could swim should be the first to jump into the sea and try to reach the shore;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and that the rest should follow, some on planks, and others on different pieces of the ship. In these various ways everyone managed to get safely ashore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 28}When we were all safe, we found that the island was called Malta.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The island\uc1\u8217*s people showed us marked kindness, for they lit a fire and took us all under shelter, because it had come on to rain and was cold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Paul had gathered a quantity of dry sticks and laid them on the fire, when a poisonous snake, driven out by the heat, fastened on his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When the islanders saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to one another, \uc1\u8220*Evidently this man is a murderer, for though he has been saved from the sea, Justice has not allowed him to live.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}However, Paul shook the creature off into the fire and took no harm.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The islanders were expecting inflammation to set in, or that he would suddenly fall dead; but, after waiting for a long time, and seeing that there was nothing amiss with him, they changed their minds and said that he was a God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In that region there was an estate belonging to the Governor of the island, whose name was Publius. He took us up to his house, and for three days entertained us most courteously.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It happened that the father of Publius was lying ill of fever and dysentery. So Paul went to see him; and, after praying, he placed his hands on him and cured him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After this, all the people in the island who had any illness came to Paul, and were cured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They also presented us with many gifts, and when we set sail they put supplies of necessaries on board.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}After three months, we set sail in a ship that had wintered in the island. She was an Alexandrian vessel, and had the Twin sons of Zeus for her figure-head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three days,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and from there we worked to windward and so got to Rhegium. A day later a south wind sprang up and took us to Puteoli in two days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}There we found some of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, and were urged to stay a week with them; after which we went on to Rome.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The followers there had heard about us, and came out as far as the Market of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. At sight of them Paul thanked God and was much cheered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}On our reaching Rome, Paul was allowed to live by himself, except for the soldier who was in charge of him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Three days after our arrival, Paul invited the leading Jews to meet him; and, when they came, he said, \uc1\u8220*Brothers, although I had done nothing hostile to the interests of our nation or to our ancestral customs, yet I was sent from Jerusalem as a prisoner, and handed over to the Romans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The Romans, when they had examined me, were ready to release me, because there was nothing in my conduct deserving death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But, as the Jewish leaders opposed my release, I was compelled to appeal to the Emperor \uc1\u8211* not, indeed, that I had any charge to make against my own nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}This, then, is my reason for urging you to come to see me and talk with me; because it is for the sake of the hope of Israel that I am here in chains.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*We,\uc1\u8221* was their reply, \uc1\u8220*have not had any letter about you from Judea, nor have any of our fellow Jews come and reported or said anything bad about you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But we will be glad to hear from you what your views are, for, with regard to this sect, we are well aware that it is spoken against on all sides.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They then fixed a day with him, and came to the place where he was staying, in even larger numbers, when Paul proceeded to lay the subject before them. He bore his testimony to the kingdom of God, and tried to convince them about Jesus, by arguments drawn from the Law of Moses and from the prophets \uc1\u8211* speaking from morning until evening.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Some were inclined to accept what he said; others, however, rejected it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So, as they disagreed among themselves, they began to disperse, Paul adding only \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8220*True, indeed, was the declaration made by the Holy Spirit, through the prophet Isaiah to your ancestors \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Go to this nation and say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You will hear with your ears without ever understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and, though you have eyes, you will see without ever perceiving.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For the mind of this nation has grown dense,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and their ears are dull of hearing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 their eyes also have they closed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 otherwise some day they might see with their eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with their ears they might hear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in their mind they might understand, and might turn \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and I might heal them.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Understand, then, that this salvation of God was sent for the Gentiles; and they will listen.\uc1\u8221*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}  Some later manuscripts add: After he said these things the Jews left, all the while engaging in a heated debate among themselves. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For two whole years Paul stayed in a house which he rented for himself, welcoming all who came to see him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}proclaiming the kingdom of God, and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ, with perfect fearlessness, unhindered.
\par}

}