{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 SAMUEL (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 2 Samuel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}Now, after the death of Saul, when David had returned from smitting the Amalekites, David remained two days in Ziklag.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then on the third day there came a man out of the camp from Saul, with his clothes torn and with earth upon his head. And as soon as he came to David, he fell to the earth and did obeisance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And David said to him, \uc1\u8220*Whence do you come?\uc1\u8221* And he answered him, \uc1\u8220*From the camp of Israel have I escaped.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And David said to him, \uc1\u8220*How was the affair? Tell me.\uc1\u8221* And he answered, \uc1\u8220*The people fled from the battle, and many of the people , and also Saul and Jonathan his son are dead.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then David said to the young man who told him, \uc1\u8220*How do you know that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the young man who told him said, \uc1\u8220*I happened to be on Mount Gilboa, just as Saul was leaning on his spear, and as the chariots and horsemen were following close after him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And when he looked behind him, he saw me and called to me. And I answered, \uc1\u8216*Here am I.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And he said to me, \uc1\u8216*Who are you?\uc1\u8217* And I replied, \uc1\u8216*I am an Amalekite.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And he said to me, \uc1\u8216*Stand, I pray, before me and slay me, for dizziness has seized me, because my life is yet whole in me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So I stood before him and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after he had fallen; and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the armlet that was on his arm, and have brought them here to my lord.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then David took hold of his clothes and tore them; and all the men who were with him did likewise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And they mourned and wept and fasted until evening for Saul and for Jonathan his son and for the people of Jehovah and for the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And David said to the young man who told him, \uc1\u8220*Whence do you come?\uc1\u8221* And he answered, \uc1\u8220*I am the son of an Amalekite sojourner.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And David said to him, \uc1\u8220*How is it that you were not afraid to put forth your hand to destroy Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s anointed?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then David called one of the young men, and said, \uc1\u8220*Go near and strike him down.\uc1\u8221* Accordingly he smote him, so that he died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And David said to him, \uc1\u8220*Your blood be upon your head, for your own mouth testified against you, when you said, \uc1\u8216*I have slain Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s anointed.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then David sang this dirge over Saul and Jonathan his son{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}(behold, it is written in the Book of Jashar), and said,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Weep, O Judah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Grieve, O Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
On thy heights are the slain!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How have the mighty fallen!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Tell it not in Gath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Declare it not in the streets of Askelon;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised exult.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Ye mountains of Giboa, may no dew descend,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Nor rain upon you, O ye fields of !
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For there was the shield of the mighty cast away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The shield of Saul, not anointed with oil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}From the blood of the slain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
From the fat of the mighty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The bow of Jonathan turned not back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The sword of Saul returned not empty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Saul and Jonathan, the beloved and the lovely!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In life and in death they were not parted;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They were swifter than eagles.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
They were stronger than lions.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Who clothed you daintily in fine linen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Who put golden ornaments on your garments, :
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8220*How have the mighty fallen in the midst of battle!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thou wert surpassingly dear to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thy love to me was far more than the love of woman!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}How have the mighty fallen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And the weapons of war perished!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Now after this David inquired of Jehovah, saying, \uc1\u8220*Shall I go up to one of the cities of Judah?\uc1\u8221* And Jehovah answered him, \uc1\u8220*Go up.\uc1\u8221* And when David said, \uc1\u8220*Whither shall I go up,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*To Hebron.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So David went up with his two wives, Ahinoam, the Jezreelitess, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And David brought up the men who were with him, each with his household, and they dwelt in the towns of Hebron.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And the men of Judah came and there anointed David king over the house of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
And when they told David about the men of Jabesh in Gilead who had buried Saul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh in Gilead and said to them, \uc1\u8220*May you be blest of Jehovah, because you have shown this kindness to your lord Saul and have buried him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Even so may Jehovah show kindness and truth to you; and I also will do well by you, because you have done this thing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now therefore be courageous and valiant; for Saul your lord is dead, and the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now Abner the son of Ner, commander of Saul\uc1\u8217*s army, had taken  the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And he made him king over Gilead and the Ashurites and Jezreel and Ephraim and Benjamin and all Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}(Ishbaal, Saul\uc1\u8217*s son, was forty years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned two years). But the house of Judah followed David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah, was seven years and six months.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Now Abner the son of Ner and the servants of Ishbaal the son of Saul went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And Joab the son of Zeruiah and the servants of David went out and met them at the pool of Gibeon. And they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool and the other on the other side of the pool.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Abner said to Joab, \uc1\u8220*Let the young men arise and play before us.\uc1\u8221* And Joab said, \uc1\u8220*Let them arise.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then they arose and went over by number: twelve for Benjamin and Ishbaal the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And they each caught his opponent by the head and thrust his sword into his side, so they fell down together. Therefore that place was called, Field of the Enemies (which is in Gibeon).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And the battle was very fierce that day, and Abner and the men of Israel were vanquished before the servants of David.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And the three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, Abishai, and Asahel; and Asahel was as swift of foot as one of the gazelles which are in the field.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And Asahel pursued Abner; and as he went he turned neither to the right nor to the left from the pursuit of Abner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then Abner looked behind him and said, \uc1\u8220*Is it you, Asahel?\uc1\u8221* And he answered, \uc1\u8220*It is I.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore Abner said to him, \uc1\u8220*Turn aside to your right or to your left and seize one of the young men and take his spoil.\uc1\u8221* But Asahel would not turn aside from pursuing him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore Abner said again to Asahel, \uc1\u8220*Turn aside from following me. Why should I smite you to the ground? How then could I look Joab your brother in the face?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But he refused to turn aside. Therefore Abner smote him with a backward stroke in the body, so that the spear came out at his back; and he fell there and died in his place. Then all who came to the place where Asahel had fallen and died, stood still. 
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But Joab and Abishai pursued after Abner. And as the sun was setting, they came to the hill of Ammah, which is before Giah on the highway in the Wilderness of Gibeon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And the Benjamites assembled behind Abner and formed a solid phalanx, and stood on the top of a hill.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then Abner called to Joab and said, \uc1\u8220*Shall the sword devour forever? Do you not know that the end will be bitterness? How long then will it be before you command the people to turn from pursuing their kinsmen?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And Joab said, \uc1\u8220*As  liveth, if you had not spoken, then assuredly not until morning would the people have ceased each from pursuing his brother.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So Joab blew the trumpet; and all the people stool still and pursued Israel no more, nor did they fight any more.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}But Abner and his men marched all that night through the Arabah and crossed the Jordan and went through the whole Bithron and came to Mahanaim.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And Joab returned from the pursuit of Abner. And when he had gathered all the people together, nineteen of David\uc1\u8217*s servants beside Asahel were missing;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}while the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin and of Abner\uc1\u8217*s men three hundred and sixty .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And they took up Asahel and buried him in his father\uc1\u8217*s sepulchre, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men marched all night, and day dawned upon them at Hebron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}And the war between the house of Saul and the house of David was prolonged; but David kept growing stronger, while the house of Saul grew gradually weaker.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now in Hebron sons were born to David: his eldest was Amnon the son of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and his second, Chileab the son of Abigail, the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and the sixth, Ithream the son of Eglah, David\uc1\u8217*s wife. These were born to David in Hebron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner made himself strong in the house of Saul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And  said to Abner, \uc1\u8220*Why do you go in unto my father\uc1\u8217*s concubine?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Abner was very angry because of the words of Ishbaal and said, \uc1\u8220*Am I a , who am at this time showing kindness to the house of Saul your father, to his kinsmen, and to his friends, and have not delivered you into the hand of David, that you now charge me with guilt in connection with a woman?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God do to Abner whatever he pleases, if, as Jehovah hath sworn to David, I do not even so to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}by transferring the kingdom from the house of Saul and by establishing the throne of David over Israel and over Judah from Dan to Beersheba.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And he did not dare to make Abner any answer, for he feared him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So Abner sent messengers to David to  saying, \uc1\u8220*Make your league with me, then I will co-operate with you in bringing over all Israel to you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And he said, \uc1\u8220*Good, I will make a league with you, but one thing I require of you, that is, you shall not see my face unless you bring Michal, Saul\uc1\u8217*s daughter, when you come to see me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then David sent messengers to Ishbaal, Saul\uc1\u8217*s son, saying, Give me my wife Michal, whom I bought for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And Ishbaal sent and took her from her husband, Paltiel the son of Laish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But her husband followed her, weeping as he went, to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, \uc1\u8220*Go, return\uc1\u8221*; and he returned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Now Abner had entered into communication with the elders of Israel, saying, \uc1\u8220*Already for a long time you have been desirous of having David king over you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now do it, for Jehovah hath spoken of David, saying, \uc1\u8216*By the hand of my servant David will I save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines and out of the hand of all their enemies?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Abner also spoke in the ears of Benjamin and went to communicate directly to David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel and to the whole house of Benjamin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And when Abner came to David at Hebron, accompanied by twenty men, David gave Abner and the men who were with him a feast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And Abner said to David, \uc1\u8220*I will arise and go and will gather all Israel to my lord the king, that they may make a covenant with you and that you may be king over all which you desire.\uc1\u8221* Then David sent Abner away, and he went in peace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Just then the servants of David and Joab came from a raid, and brought in with them great spoil; but Abner was not with David in Hebron, for he had sent him away and he had gone in peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So when Joab and all the band that was with him came home, they told Joab, saying, \uc1\u8220*Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he has sent him away, and he has gone in peace.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then Joab went to the king and said, \uc1\u8220*What have you done? Behold, Abner came to you; why have you now sent him away, so that he is gone?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Do you not know that Abner the son of Ner came to deceive you and to note your going out and your coming in and to know all that you are doing?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And when Joab came out from David, he sent messengers after Abner and they brought him back from the Cistern of Sirah without David\uc1\u8217*s knowing it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And when Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him apart to the  of the gate to speak with him quietly and smote him there in the body. So he died for the blood of Asahel Joab\uc1\u8217*s brother.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But afterward when David heard it, he said, \uc1\u8220*I and my kingdom are forever guiltless before Jehovah of the blood of Abner the son of Ner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}May it fall upon the head of Joab and upon all his father\uc1\u8217*s house, and may there not fail from the house of Joab one who has an issue, or who is a leper, or who is effeminate, or who falls by the sword, or who lacks bread.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And David said to Joab, and to all the people who were with him, \uc1\u8220*Tear your clothes, and gird yourselves with sackloth, and mourn before Abner!\uc1\u8221* And King David followed the bier.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And when they buried Abner in Hebron, the king wept with a loud voice at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And the king sang a dirge for Abner and said,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Must Abner die as dies the impious fool?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Thy hands were not bound,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thy feet were not put into fetters;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
As one falls before ruthless men, thou didst fall.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
Then all the people wept still more over him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Afterwards all the people came to urge David to eat bread while it was yet day; but David took oath, saying, \uc1\u8220*God do to me whatever he will, if I taste bread or anything else before the sun goes down.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And when all the people observed it, they were pleased;  everything that the king did pleased all the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}So all the people and all Israel understood that day that the king had nothing to do with the slaying of Abner the son of Ner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And the king said to his servants, \uc1\u8220*Do you not know that a prince and a great man has fallen to-day in Israel?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}And I am this day weak, though anointed king, for these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too strong for me. May Jehovah requite the evildoer according to his wickedness!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Now when Ishbaal, Saul\uc1\u8217*s son, heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands became limp and all the Israelites were thrown into confusion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And Ishbaal, Saul\uc1\u8217*s son, had two men who were captains of guerilla bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the Benjamites (for Beeroth is also reckoned to Benjamin,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and the Beerothites fled to Gittaim and have been sojourners there until this day).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now Jonathan, Saul\uc1\u8217*s son, had a son who was lame in his feet. He was five years old when the news came from Jezreel regarding Saul and Jonathan. And his nurse took him up and fled, and while she was hastily fleeing, he fell and became lame. And his name was Meribaal.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went and came about mid-day to the house of Ishbaal, as he was taking his rest at noon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And just then the doorkeeper of the palace was cleaning wheat, and she became drowsy and slept. So Rechab and Baanah his brother slipt in and thus entered the house, while the king was lying on his bed in his sleeping room, and they smote and killed him and cut off his head.  
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then they took his head and went all night by the way of the Arabah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And they brought the head of Ishbaal to David to Hebron and said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Here is the head of Ishbaal, the son of Saul your enemy, who sought your life. But Jehovah hath avenged my lord the king this day on Saul and his descendants.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, \uc1\u8220*As Jehovah liveth, who hath delivered my life out of all adversity,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}when one told me, saying, \uc1\u8216*Behold, Saul is dead,\uc1\u8217* thinking to have brought good news, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his own bed, shall I not now require his blood from you and destroy you from the earth?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then David commanded his young men, and they slew them and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up beside the pool in Hebron. But the head of Ishbaal they took and buried in the grave of Abner at Hebron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Then all the tribes of Israel came to David to Hebron and said, \uc1\u8220*See, we are your bone and your flesh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In times past when Saul was king over us, it was you who led out and brought in Israel, and Jehovah has said to you, \uc1\u8216*Thou shalt be shepherd of my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron, and King David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah, and they anointed David king over Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}David was thirty years old when he became king, and reigned forty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, who spoke to David, saying, \uc1\u8220*You shall not come in here, but the blind and the lame shall turn you away\uc1\u8221*, thinking, \uc1\u8220*David cannot come in here.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion (that is the city of David).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And David said on that day, \uc1\u8220*Whoever smites the Jebusites, let him get up through the watercourse and smite the lame and the blind, whom David\uc1\u8217*s soul hates.\uc1\u8221* Therefore it is said, \uc1\u8220*The blind and the lame cannot come into the temple.\uc1\u8221* {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then David dwelt in the stronghold, and called it the City of David. And David constructed an encircling wall from Millo and inwards.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And David kept on growing greater, for  of hosts was with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees and carpenters and masons and they built David a palace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Thus David perceived that Jehovah had established him king over Israel,  for the sake of his people Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And in Jerusalem David took for himself more concubines and wives, after he came there from Hebron; and more sons and daughters were born to David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And these are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammaua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Elishama, , and Eliphelet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Now when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David; and when David heard of this he went down to the stronghold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now the Philistines had come and spread themselves out in the valley of Rephaim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And David inquired of Jehovah, saying, \uc1\u8220*Shall I go up against the Philistines? Wilt thou deliver them into my hand?\uc1\u8221* And Jehovah said to David, \uc1\u8220*Go up; for I will certainly deliver the Philistines into thy hand.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And David came to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there; and he said, \uc1\u8220*Jehovah hath broken down mine enemies before me, like the breaking of waters.\uc1\u8221* Therefore he called the name of that place Baal-perazim (Lord of the breakings through).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And they left their  there, and David and his men carried them away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And the Philistines came up yet again and spread themselves out in the valley of Rephaim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And when David inquired of Jehovah, he said, \uc1\u8220*Thou shalt not go up; go about to their rear and come upon them opposite the balsam trees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And when thou hearest the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, make haste, for then Jehovah has gone out before thee to smite the camp of the Philistines.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And David did as Jehovah commanded him, and smote the Philistines from  as far as Gezer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Then David again assembled all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And David arose and went with all the people who were with him, to Baal-Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God which is called by the name of Jehovah of hosts who sits enthroned upon the cherubim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab, that was on the hill, with Uzzah and Ahio the sons of Abinadab guiding the cart: Uzzah went with the ark of God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4} while Ahio went before the ark.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And David and all the house of Israel were dancing before Jehovah with all their might and with songs and harps and lyres and cymbals.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And when they came to the threshing-floor of Nacon, Uzzah stretched out his hand to the ark of God to hold it, for the oxen slipped.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then the anger of Jehovah was aroused against Uzzah and God smote him there because , so that he died there in the presence of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And David was angry because he had broken forth upon Uzzah. Therefore that place is called Perez-uzzah (Breach of Uzzah) to this day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And David was afraid of Jehovah that day so that he said, \uc1\u8220*How can the ark of Jehovah come to me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And David was unwilling to remove the ark of Jehovah to the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gitite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So the ark remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months. And Jehovah blessed Obed-edom and all his house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And when the report came to King David: \uc1\u8220*Jehovah hath blessed Obed-edom and all his house because of the ark of God\uc1\u8221*, David went and brought up with joy the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom to the city of David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And when the bearers of the ark of Jehovah had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And David was dancing before Jehovah with all his might, and David was girded with a linen ephod.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of Jehovah with shouting, and the sound of the trumpet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now when the ark of Jehovah was coming into the city of David, Michal the daughter of Saul looked out of the window, and when she saw King David leaping and dancing before Jehovah, she despised him in her heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And when they brought in the ark of Jehovah and set it in its place in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it, David offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And when David had finished sacrificing the burnt-offering and the peace-offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And he distributed to all the people even among the whole multitude of Israel, both men and women, to each a cake of bread, a portion of meat, and a bunch of raisins. Then all the people departed each to his home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But when David returned to greet his family, Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David and said, \uc1\u8220*How glorious was the king of Israel as he exposed himself to the eyes of his servants\uc1\u8217* maids, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly exposes himself!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And David said to Michal, \uc1\u8220*It was before Jehovah  who chose me rather than your father and rather than any of his family to appoint me as prince over the people of Jehovah, over Israel. Therefore I will sport before Jehovah{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and I will be yet more lightly esteemed than this and I will be despised . But of the maids of whom you have spoken I shall indeed be held in honor.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And Michal the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Now when David had taken possession of his palace, Jehovah having given him rest around about from all his enemies,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the king said to Nathan the prophet, \uc1\u8220*See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells within tent-curtains.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And Nathan said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Go, do all that you purpose for Jehovah is with you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But during the same night the word of Jehovah came to Nathan, saying,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Go and tell my servant David, \uc1\u8216*Thus saith Jehovah, \uc1\u8220*Shouldst thou build a temple for me to dwell in?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I have not dwelt in a temple since the day that I brought up the Israelites from Egypt, even to this day, but have gone about in a tent-dwelling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As long as I went about with all the Israelites, did I say anything to one of Israel\uc1\u8217*s , whom I commanded to be a shepherd to my people Israel, saying: \uc1\u8216*Why have ye not built me a house of cedar?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now therefore thus shalt thou say to my servant David, \uc1\u8216*Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, \uc1\u8220*I took thee from the pasture, from after the sheep, that thou shouldest be prince over my people, over Israel;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and I have been with thee wherever thou didst go, to destroy all thine enemies from before thee, and I will make thee a , like the name of the great in the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and I will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and be moved no more, and the wicked shall no more afflict them as formerly,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I will give thee rest from all thine enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And when thy days are complete,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And thou shalt lie down with thy fathers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will raise up thy descendants after thee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Who shall come forth from thy body;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I will establish their kingdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He shall build a home for my name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I will establish his royal throne forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will be to him a father,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And he shall be to me a son;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When he commits iniquity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will correct him with the rod of men,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And with the stripes of the sons of Adam.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And my kindness will  not withdraw from him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
As I withdrew it from him who was before thee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Thy house and kingdom shall always stand firm before me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thy throne shall be established forever.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}According to all these words and according to all this vision, Nathan spoke to David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then King David went in and sat before Jehovah and said, \uc1\u8220*Who am I, O Lord Jehovah, and what is my house, that thou hast brought me thus far?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And this was too small a thing in thine eyes, O Lord Jehovah, that thou hast spoken also concerning thy servant\uc1\u8217*s house for distant times, and {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And what shall David say more to thee, for thou knowest thy servant, O Lord Jehovah?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For thy servant\uc1\u8217*s sake and according to thine heart hast thou done .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore thou art great, O Jehovah  God, for there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And what other nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom a God went to redeem for himself as a people, to make him a name and to do for  great and terrible things {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But thou didst establish thy people Israel as thine own people forever, and thou, Jehovah, hast become their God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And now, O Lord Jehovah, confirm forever the promise that thou hast made concerning thy servant and concerning his house, and do as thou hast promised,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}that thy name be great forever, in that it will be said, \uc1\u8216*Jehovah of hosts is God over Israel; and the house of thy servant David shall be established before thee.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For thou, O Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, \uc1\u8216*I will build thee a house;\uc1\u8217* therefore hath thy servant found courage to pray this prayer to thee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And now, O Lord Jehovah, thou art God, and thy words are truth, and thou hast promised this good thing to thy servant;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}now therefore may it please thee to bless the house of thy servant that it may continue forever before thee! For thou, O Lord Jehovah, hast spoken it, and with thy blessing will the house of thy servant be forever blessed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}And after this David smote the Philistines, and subdued them; and David took the bridle of the mother city out of the hand of the Philistines.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then  smote Moab and measured them off with a line, making them lie down on the ground; and he measured  to put to death and one full line to save alive. And thus the Moabites became subject to David, and brought a present.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Thus David smote Hadadezer the son of Rehob, the king of Zobah, as he went to establish his rule at the River Euphrates.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And David took from him , and twenty thousand footmen: and David hamstrung all the chariot horses leaving only a hundred of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And when the Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Arameans twenty thousand men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then David put garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and the Arameans became subject to David and brought a present. And Jehovah helped David wherever he went.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And David took the shields of gold that were on on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And from  and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David took a great amount of brass.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And when  king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the army of Hadadezer,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10} sent  his son to King David, to greet him and to wish him good fortune, because he had fought against Hadadezer and smitten him, for Hadadezer was  military antagonist. And he brought with him vessels of silver, of gold, and of brass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}These also King David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and gold that he dedicated from all the nations that he subdued--{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}from , Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek, and from the spoil of Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then David made a reputation for himself. On his return, he smote of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt, eighteen thousand men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And he put garrisons in all Edom; and all the Edomites became subject to David. And Jehovah helped David wherever he went.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And David was king over all Israel. And David administered justice and righteousness to all his people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And Joab the son of Zeruiah was in command of the army, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was chancellor,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and Zadok  and  the son of  were priests, and  was scribe,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and Benaiah the son of Jehoida was in command of the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and David\uc1\u8217*s sons were priests.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}And David said, \uc1\u8220*Is there left of the house of Saul any to whom I may show kindness for Jonathan\uc1\u8217*s sake?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba, and they called him to David. And the king Said to him, \uc1\u8220*Are you Ziba?\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*Your servant am I.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The king said, \uc1\u8220*Is there no one else belonging to the house of Saul to whom I may show the kindness of God?\uc1\u8221* And Ziba said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Jonathan has still a son, who is lame in his feet.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And the king said to him, \uc1\u8220*Where is he?\uc1\u8221* And Ziba said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Behold he is in the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then King David sent and brought him from the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And when Meribaal the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David, he fell on his face and did obeisance. David said, \uc1\u8220*Meribaal!\uc1\u8221* And he answered, \uc1\u8220*Behold your servant!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then David said to him, \uc1\u8220*Fear not for I will surely show you kindness for the sake of Jonathan your father and will restore to you all the land of Saul your ancestor; and you shall eat my table continually.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And he did obeisance and said, \uc1\u8220*What is your servant that you should look favorably upon such a dead dog as I am?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the king called to Ziba, Saul\uc1\u8217*s servant, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*All that belongs to Saul and all his house have I given to your master\uc1\u8217*s son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And you shall cultivate the land for him, together with your sons and servants, and bring in the fruits that you master\uc1\u8217*s son may have food to eat; but Meribaal your master\uc1\u8217*s son shall always eat bread at my table.\uc1\u8221* Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then said Ziba to the king, \uc1\u8220*Just as my lord the king commands his servant, so will your servant do.\uc1\u8221* So Meribaal ate at  table like one of the sons of the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And Meribaal had a young son, whose name was Mica. And all who dwelt in the house of Ziba were Meribaal\uc1\u8217*s servants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So Meribaal dwelt in Jerusalem, for he ate continually at the king\uc1\u8217*s table, being lame in both feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Now it came to pass after this, that the king of the Ammonites died and Hanun his son became king in his place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And David said, \uc1\u8220*I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash as his father showed kindness to me.\uc1\u8221* So David sent by his servants to console with him concerning his father. But when David\uc1\u8217*s servants came to the land of the Ammonites,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}the princes of the Ammonites said to Hanun their lord, \uc1\u8220*Do you suppose that David is honoring your father in sending comforters to you? Has not David sent his servants to you to search the city and to spy it out and to overthrow it?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Hanun took David\uc1\u8217*s servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, cut their robes in two, even to their hips, and sent them away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When David was informed , he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Stay at Jericho until your beards are grown and then return.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now when the Ammonites saw that they had become odious to David, the Ammonites sent and hired the Arameans of Beth-rehob, and the Arameans of Zobah, twenty thousand footmen, and the king of Maacah and of Ishtob with twelve thousand men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And when David heard of it, he sent Joab and all  and the trained warriors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And the Ammonites came out, and drew up in battle-array at the entrance of the city. And the Arameans of Zobah and Rehob, and Ishtob and Maacah, were by themselves in the open country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But when Joab saw that he was being attacked both in front and in the rear, he selected the picked men of Israel, and put them in array against the Arameans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And the rest of the people he placed under the command of Abishai his brother; and he put them in array against the Ammonites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And he said, \uc1\u8220*If the Arameans should be too strong for me, then you shall help me, but if the Ammonites should be too strong for you, then I will come to your aid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Be courageous and let us know ourselves men for the sake of our people and for the cities of our God; and may Jehovah do that which seems good to him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Now when Joab and the people who were with him drew near for the battle against the Arameans, they fled before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And when the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai, and entered into the city. Then Joab returned from the Ammonites, and came to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But when the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by the Israelites, they gathered themselves together,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and  sent, and brought out the Arameans who were beyond the River (Euphrates), and they came to Helam with Shobach, the commander of the army of Hadadezer, at their head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And when it was reported to David, he gathered all Israel together and crossed over the Jordan and came to Helam. And the Arameans set themselves in array against David and fought with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And the Arameans fled before Israel; and David slew of the Arameans seven hundred  and forty thousand  and smote Shobach the commander of their army, so that he died there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And when all the kings who were subject to Hadadezer saw that they were defeated by Israel, they made peace with Israel and were subject to them. So the Arameans feared to help the Ammonites any more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Now, a year later, at the time when  are accustomed to go forth, David sent Joab and his servants with him, even all Israel; and they destroyed the Ammonites, and besieged Rabbah. But David remained at Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now once at eventide, while Joab was besieging Rabbath-Ammon, David arose from his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king\uc1\u8217*s palace; and from the roof he saw a woman bathing. And the woman was very beautiful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And David sent to inquire concerning the woman. And one said, \uc1\u8220*Is not this Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then David sent messengers to take her; and she came to him, and he lay with her--she having been purified from her uncleanness. Then she returned to her house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the woman conceived; and she sent to tell David, saying, \uc1\u8220*I am with child.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then David said to Joab, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And when Uriah had come to him, David asked him concerning the welfare of Joab and the people and the progress of the war.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then David said to Uriah, \uc1\u8220*Go down to your house and wash your feet.\uc1\u8221* And Uriah departed from the king\uc1\u8217*s house, and there followed him a portion from the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But Uriah slept at the door of the king\uc1\u8217*s house with the servants of his lord and did not go down to his house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now when it was told David, Uriah did not go down to his house, \uc1\u8220*David said to Uriah, have you not come from a journey? Why did you not go down to your house?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Uriah said to David, \uc1\u8220*The ark and Israel and Judah are abiding in huts, and my master Joab, and the servants of my lord are camping in the open fields; shall I then go to my house to eat and drink and to lie with my wife! , I cannot do this.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then David said to Uriah, \uc1\u8220*Stay here to-day also, and to-morrow I will let you go.\uc1\u8221* So Uriah remained in Jerusalem {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}David invited him and he ate and drank before him, so that he made drunk. Then in the evening he went out to lie on his couch with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And in the morning, David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by Uriah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And he wrote in the letter saying, \uc1\u8220*Set Uriah in the face of the fiercest fighting, then retreat from behind him, that he may be smitten and die.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So in keeping guard over the city, Joab assigned Uriah to the place where he knew valiant men were.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And when the city went out to fight with Joab, there fell some of the soldiers of David, and Uriah the Hittite fell also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Joab sent to tell David all the facts concerning the war.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And he instructed the messenger, saying, \uc1\u8220*When you have finished telling all the facts concerning the war to the king,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}then if the king\uc1\u8217*s wrath is aroused, and he say to you, \uc1\u8216*Why did you go so near to the city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot from the wall?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal? Did not a woman cast an upper millstone upon him from the wall, so that he died at Thebez? Why did you go near the wall?\uc1\u8217* Then shall you say, \uc1\u8216*Your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So the messenger of Joab went to the king at Jerusalem and came and told David all that Joab commanded him concerning the war. Then David was very angry with Joab, and he said to the messenger, \uc1\u8220*Why did you go near the city to fight? Did you not know the would shoot you from the wall? Who smote Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal? Did not a woman cast an upper millstone upon him from the wall, so that he died in Thebez? Why did you go near the wall?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then the messenger said to David, \uc1\u8220*The men boldly attacked us and came out to us in the open field, and so we drove them back even to the entrance of the gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And the archers shot at your servants from the wall; and some of the king\uc1\u8217*s servants are dead.\uc1\u8221* But the messenger said, \uc1\u8220*Your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Thereupon David said to the messenger, \uc1\u8220*Thus shall you say to Joab, \uc1\u8216*Let not this thing displease you, for the sword devours one as well as another; persist in your attack upon the city, and overthrow it,\uc1\u8217* and encourage him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Now when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she made lamentation for her husband.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But when the mourning was over, David sent and took her home to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Then Jehovah sent  Nathan to David. And he came to him, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*There were two men in one city, the one rich, the other poor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The rich man had very many flocks and herds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But the poor man had nothing, except one little ewe lamb, which he had bought. And he nourished it and it grew up with him and with his children. It used to eat of his own morsel, and drink out of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was to him as a daughter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But there came a traveller to the rich man, and he spared his own flock and did not take from it nor from his own herd to make ready for the traveller who had come to him, but took the poor man\uc1\u8217*s lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then David\uc1\u8217*s anger was greatly aroused against the man, and he said to Nathan, \uc1\u8220*As Jehovah liveth, the man who has done this is worthy of death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and he shall restore the lamb , because he showed no pity.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore Nathan said to David, \uc1\u8220*You are the man! Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, \uc1\u8216*I anointed thee king over Israel and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and I gave thee thy master\uc1\u8217*s house and thy master\uc1\u8217*s wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah, and if that were too little, I would add to you as much again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Why have you despised the word of Jehovah by doing that which is evil? You have smitten Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be your wife, and have slain him with the sword of the Ammonites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now therefore the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have despised me and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Thus saith Jehovah, \uc1\u8216*Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives from before thine eyes and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}for thou didst it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then David said to Nathan, \uc1\u8220*I have sinned against Jehovah.\uc1\u8221* And Nathan said to David, \uc1\u8220*Jehovah also put away your sin; you shall not die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet, because by this deed you have scorned , the child also that is born to you shall surely die.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And Nathan departed to his house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
And Jehovah smote the child which Uriah\uc1\u8217*s wife bore to David, so that it fell sick.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then David besought God for the child, and fasted and went in and lay all night  upon the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And the elders of his house stood over him in order to raise him up from the earth; but he would not arise, neither would be eat bread with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But on the seventh day the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead, for they said, \uc1\u8220*Behold while the child was yet alive, we spoke to him, and he hearkened not to our voice; how can we say the child is dead, for he will do some harm!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But when David saw that his servants were whispering together, David perceived that the child was dead, and David said to his servants, \uc1\u8220*Is the child dead?\uc1\u8221* And they said, \uc1\u8220*He is dead.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then David arose from the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and changed his garments; and he came into the house of Jehovah and worshipped. Then he went to his own house; and he asked for bread and they set it before him and he ate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then said to his servants to him, \uc1\u8220*What is this you have done? You fasted and wept for the child, while it was alive, but when the child died, you arose and ate bread.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And he said, \uc1\u8220*While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I said, \uc1\u8216*Who knows whether Jehovah will have mercy, so that the child will live?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But now he is dead; why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I am going to him, but he will not come back to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her and lay with her and she  bore a son whose name he called Solomon. And Jehovah loved him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and sent a message through Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah (The Beloved of Jehovah),  of Jehovah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And Joab fought against Rabbah of the Ammonites and took the .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then Joab sent messengers to David, saying, \uc1\u8220*I have fought against Rabbah; also I have taken the water city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it, lest I take the city and it should be called by my name.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}So David gathered all the people together and went to Rabbah and fought against it and took it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And he took the crown of Milcom from his head; and its weight was about one hundred and forty pounds of gold, and in it was a precious stone; and it was set on David\uc1\u8217*s head. And he brought away the great amount of spoil that was in the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And he brought away the people who were in it, and put them at the saws and picks and axes of iron and made them  the brickmounds. Even thus he did all the cities of the Ammonites. Then David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Now afterwards it came to pass that Absalom the son of David had a beautiful sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And Amnon was so distressed that he became sick because of his sister Tamar--for she was a virgin--and it seemed to Amnon impossible to do anything to her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David\uc1\u8217*s brother, and Jonadab was a very shrewd man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And he said to him, \uc1\u8220*Why are you, a king\uc1\u8217*s son, so ill every morning? Will you not tell me?\uc1\u8221* And Amnon said to him, \uc1\u8220*I love Tamar, my brother Absalom\uc1\u8217*s sister.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And Jonadab said to him, \uc1\u8220*Lie down on your bed, and pretend to be sick. Then when your father comes to see you, say to him, \uc1\u8216*Let my sister Tamar come and give me bread to eat, and prepare the food in my sight, that I may see it and eat from her hand.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Amnon lay down and pretended to be sick. And when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Let my sister Tamar come and make a few heart-shaped cakes in my sight, that I may eat from her hand.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So David sent home to Tamar, saying, \uc1\u8220*Go now to your brother Amnon\uc1\u8217*s house, and prepare food for him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So Tamar went to her brother Amnon\uc1\u8217*s house while he lay in bed. And she took dough and kneaded it and made cakes as he looked on, and baked the cakes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And she took the pan and poured them out before him, but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, \uc1\u8220*Let all go out from me.\uc1\u8221* And they all went out from him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And Amnon said to Tamar, \uc1\u8220*Bring the food into the inner room, that I may take from your hand.\uc1\u8221* And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the inner room to Amnon her brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And when she had brought them to him to eat, he took hold of her and said to her, \uc1\u8220*Come, lie with me, my sister.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And she answered him, \uc1\u8220*No, my brother, do not force me, for it is not so done in Israel; do not commit this impious act of folly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And as for me, whither could I carry my shame? and as for you, you would become one of the impious fools in Israel. Now therefore, I beg you, speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But he would not hearken to her, but being stronger than she, he violated her and lay with her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Amnon hated her with great hatred, for the hatred with which he hated her was greater than he love with which he had loved her. And Amnon said to her, \uc1\u8220*Arise, be gone!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But she said to him, \uc1\u8220*No, my brother; far greater is the second wrong in sending me away than the first that you did to me.\uc1\u8221* And he would not listen to her, {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}but called his servant who  and said, \uc1\u8220*Put this woman out from my presence, and bolt the door after her.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And she wore a long-sleeved tunic, for thus the royal maidens were formerly wont to be clad. Then his servant put her out and bolted the door after her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her long-sleeved tunic which she wore; and she put her hand on her head, and went her way, crying aloud as she went.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And Absalom her own brother said to her, \uc1\u8220*Has Amnon your brother been with you? But now, my sister, be silent, for he is your brother; do not take this thing to heart.\uc1\u8221* So Tamar dwelt desolate in her brother Absalom\uc1\u8217*s house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But when King David heard of all these things, he was very angry, .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And Absalom spoke to Amnon neither good nor bad; for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had violated his sister Tamar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now it happened after two years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baal Hazor near Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king\uc1\u8217*s sons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And Absalom came to the king and said, \uc1\u8220*See your servant has sheepshearers; let the king, I pray, and his servants go with your servant.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But the king said to Absalom, \uc1\u8220*No my son, let us not all go, lest we be burdensome to you. And he pressed him; however, he would not go but bade him farewell.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then Absalom said, \uc1\u8220*If not, then let my brother Amnon go with us.\uc1\u8221* And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Why should he go with you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But when Absalom pressed him, he let Amnon and all the king\uc1\u8217*s sons go with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then Absalom commanded his servants, saying, \uc1\u8220*See to it, when Amnon\uc1\u8217*s heart is merry with wine, and when I say to you, \uc1\u8216*Smite Amnon,\uc1\u8217* then kill him. Fear not; have not I commanded you? Be brave and show yourselves valiant men!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And the servants of Absalom did to Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king\uc1\u8217*s sons arose and each mounted his mule and fled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And while they were on the way, the news came to David: \uc1\u8220*Absalom has slain all the king\uc1\u8217*s sons so that there is not one of them left.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then the king arose and tore his clothes and lay on the earth; and all his servants .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David\uc1\u8217*s brother, answered and said, \uc1\u8220*Let not my lord suppose that they have killed all the young men, the king\uc1\u8217*s sons, for Amnon only is dead, since by the statement of Absalom this was decided from the day of the violation of his sister Tamar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Now therefore let not my lord the king take this thing to heart, to think that all the king\uc1\u8217*s sons are dead; for Amnon only is dead.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34} And when the  lifted up his eyes and looked, there were many people coming . {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And Jonadab said to the king, \uc1\u8220*There the king\uc1\u8217*s sons are coming, as your servant said so it has come to pass.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}As soon as he had finished speaking, the king\uc1\u8217*s sons came and lifted up their voices and wept; and the king also and all his servants wept loudly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Absalom fled and went to Talmai the son of Amihud, king of Geshur, and David mourned continually for his son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38} and remained there three years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39} longed to go out to Absalom, for he was comforted for the death of Amnon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Now when Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king\uc1\u8217*s heart was favorable towards Absalom,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Joab sent to Tekoa and brought from there a wise woman and said to her, \uc1\u8220*Pretend to be a mourner and put on mourning garments and do not anoint yourself with oil, but become like a woman who has been many days mourning for one dead,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and go to the king and speak thus with him.\uc1\u8221* So Joab put the words in her mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And the Tekoite woman came to the king, and prostrated herself upon the ground and did obeisance, crying, \uc1\u8220*Help, O king\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the king said to her, \uc1\u8220*What is wrong with you?\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*Verily, I am a widow and my husband is dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And your maid-servant had two sons, and these two quarelled in the field when there was no one to part them, and one smote the other and killed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And now the whole clan has risen up against your maid-servant and say, \uc1\u8216*Deliver up the slayer of his brother, that we may put him to death for the life of his brother whom he has killed, and we will destroy the heir.\uc1\u8217* Thus they will quench my remaining coal so as to leave to my husband neither name nor remnant on the face of the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the king said to the woman, \uc1\u8220*Go to your house and I will give orders regarding you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And the woman of Tekoa said to the king, \uc1\u8220*My lord, O king, the guilt be on me and on my father\uc1\u8217*s house; and the king and his throne be innocent.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Whoever saith anything to you bring him to me and he shall not touch you again.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then she said, \uc1\u8220*I pray, let the king swear by Jehovah thy God, not to let the avenger of blood destroy and not let them exterminate my son.\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*As Jehovah liveth, not one hair of your son shall fall to the ground.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the woman said, \uc1\u8220*Let your maid-servant, I pray you, speak a word to my lord the king.\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*Speak.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And the woman said, \uc1\u8220*Why then do you devise such a thing against the people of God? For in rendering this decision the king is as one that is guilty, in that the king does not bring back his banished one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}{This verse will need special attention.} For we die and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; and God will not take away the life of him who devises means not to keep in banishment one who is banished.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Now the reason why I have come to speak this word to my lord the king is because the people made me afraid, and your maid-servant said, \uc1\u8216*I will now speak to the king; it may be that the king will perform the request of his servant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For the king will hear, to deliver his servant out of the hand of the man who seeks to destroy me and my son from the heritage of  .\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then your maid-servant said, \uc1\u8216*Let the word of my lord the king be a comfort, for like the Messenger of God is my lord the king to hear good and evil.\uc1\u8217* And Jehovah thy God be with you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then the king answered and said to the woman, \uc1\u8220*Do not conceal from me, I pray, anything that I may ask you.\uc1\u8221* And the woman said, \uc1\u8220*Let my lord the king now speak.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Was the hand of Joab with you in all this?\uc1\u8221* And the woman answered and said, \uc1\u8220*As sure as you live, my lord the king, I cannot turn to the right hand or to the left from all that my lord the king has spoken, for your servant Joab bade me put all these words in the mouth of your maid-servant;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}in order to change the face of affairs has your servant done this thing. But my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of the Messenger of God, so that he knows all things that are in the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And the king said to Joab, \uc1\u8220*See now, I have granted this request; go therefore, bring the young man Absalom back.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then Joab fell to the ground on his face and did obeisance and blessed the king. And Joab said, \uc1\u8220*To-day your servant knows that I have found favor in your sight, my lord, O king, in that the king has granted the request of his servant.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom back to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Let him live apart in his own house, but my face he shall not see.\uc1\u8221* So Absalom lived apart to his own house, but he did not see the king\uc1\u8217*s face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now no man in Israel was so praiseworthy for his beauty as Absalom: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And when he shaved his head--at the end every year he cut it, because it was heavy on him, therefore he cut it--he would weigh his hair, about six pounds according to the royal standard of weight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And to Absalom there were born three sons and one daughter, whose name was Tamar--she was a beautiful woman.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And Absalom dwelt two years in Jerusalem, without seeing the king\uc1\u8217*s face.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the king; but he would not come to him. Then he sent again a second time, but he would not come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Therefore he said to his servants, \uc1\u8220*See Joab\uc1\u8217*s field is near mine, where he has barley; go and set it on fire.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom at his house and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Why have your servants set my field on fire?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And Absalom answered Joab, \uc1\u8220*Behold, I sent to you, saying, \uc1\u8216*Come here that I may send you to the king, to say, \uc1\u8220*Why have I come from Geshur? It were better for me to be there still.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* Now therefore let me see the king\uc1\u8217*s face, and if there be guilt in me, let him kill me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And when Joab went to the king and told him, he called Absalom. And he came to the king and bowed himself with his face to the ground before the king. Then the king kissed Absalom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}Now later Absalom prepared a chariot and horses and fifty men to run before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And Absalom used to rise early and stand beside the way which led to the gate, and every man who had a suit to come before the king for judgment, Absalom would call to himself and say, \uc1\u8220*Of what city are you?\uc1\u8221* And when he replied, \uc1\u8220*Your servant is of one of the tribes of Israel\uc1\u8221*,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Absalom said to him, \uc1\u8220*Evidently your claims are good and right; but there is no man deputed by the king to hear you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Absalom said moreover, \uc1\u8220*O that someone would make me judge in the land, that to me might come every man who has any suit or cause, and I would give him justice!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And whenever man came near to do obeisance, he would put out his hand and take hold of him and kiss him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And in this way Absalom did to all the Israelites who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And at the end of  years, Absalom said to the king, \uc1\u8220*I would like to go and pay my vow, which I have vowed to Jehovah, in Hebron.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For your servant vowed the following vow while I abode at Geshur in Aram, \uc1\u8216*If Jehovah shall indeed bring me back to Jerusalem, I will serve Jehovah .\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the king said to him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Absalom sent emissaries into all the tribes of Israel, saying, \uc1\u8220*As soon as you hear the sound of the trumpet, then say, \uc1\u8216*Absalom has become king in Hebron.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And with Absalom went two hundred men from Jerusalem, who were invited and went in their innocence and knew nothing at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And Absalom sent  Ahithophel the Gilonite, David\uc1\u8217*s counsellor, from his city Giloh, while he was offering the sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong, for the people with Absalom kept increasing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And when a messenger came to David, saying, \uc1\u8220*The heart of the men of Israel has gone after Absalom\uc1\u8221*,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, \uc1\u8220*Up, let us flee; for otherwise there will be for us no escape from Absalom. Make haste to depart, lest he quickly overtake us and bring down evil upon us and put the city to the edge of the sword.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the king\uc1\u8217*s servants said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Just as our lord the king decides, we are your servants.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So the king went out, and all his household with him. And the king left behind ten concubines to keep the palace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And the king and all the people who followed him went out and stood at the last house,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}while all his officers passed beside him, and all the Cherethites and all the Pelethites and all , six hundred who had followed him from Gath passed on before the king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, \uc1\u8220*Why will you also go with us? Return and stay with the king; for you are a foreigner and an exile from your own land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Yesterday you came and to-day shall I make you wander with us, while I go whither I may? Return, and take your fellow countrymen back with you; and .\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But Ittai answered the king, and said, \uc1\u8220*As Jehovah liveth and as my lord the king liveth, wherever my lord the king shall be--whether for death or for life--there will your servant be.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And David said to Ittai, \uc1\u8220*Well then, go, and pass on.\uc1\u8221* So Ittai the Gittite passed on with all his men and all the little ones that were with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}{This verse will need special attention.} And all the inhabitants of the land were weeping loudly as all the people passed on. While the king stood in the Kidron valley, the people were passing by before him toward the olive tree in the wilderness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And there was Zadok and  with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God,  until all the people had all passed out out of the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And the king said to Zadok and Abiathar, \uc1\u8220*Carry back the ark of God into the city. If I shall find favor in the eyes of Jehovah, he will bring me back, and show me both it and his dwelling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But if he say, \uc1\u8216*I have no delight in thee\uc1\u8217*; then here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}{This verse will need special attention.} The king also said to Zadok and Abiathar the priests, \uc1\u8220*Behold, return to the city in peace and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz your son and Jonathan the son Abiathar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}See, I am going to delay at the fords of the wilderness, until word comes from you to inform me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Therefore Zadok and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem, and they remained there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But David went up the ascent to the Mount of Olives, weeping as he went, and with his head covered and his feet bare. All the people who were with him also covered each his head, and also went up, weeping as they went.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And when David was told, \uc1\u8220*Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom\uc1\u8221*, David said, \uc1\u8220*O Jehovah, I pray, turn the counsel of Ahithophel to foolishness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And when David came to the summit, where one worships God, there came to meet him Hushai the Archite with his garment rent and earth upon his head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And David said to him, \uc1\u8220*If you go on with me you will be a burden to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But if you return to the city, and say to Absalom, \uc1\u8216*Your brothers have gone away and the king your father has gone away after them, I will be thy servant, O king; I have been your father\uc1\u8217*s servant in the past, so now I will be your servant\uc1\u8217*, thus you can defeat for me the counsel of Ahithophel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And have you not here with you Zadok and Abiathar the priests? Everything that you hear from the king\uc1\u8217*s palace tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}See, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz, Zadok\uc1\u8217*s son, and Jonathan, Abiathar\uc1\u8217*s son; and by them you shall send to me everything that you shall hear.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}So Hushai, David\uc1\u8217*s friend, came into the city, when Absalom came to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}And David was a little past the summit, when Ziba the servant of Meribaal met him with a pair of asses saddled, and on them two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred bunches of raisins, and a hundred cakes of preserved fruits, and a skin of wine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And the king said to Ziba, \uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8221* And Ziba answered, \uc1\u8220*The asses are for the king\uc1\u8217*s household to ride on, and the bread and the preserved fruit for the young men to eat, and the wine, that those who are faint in the wilderness may drink.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And the king said, \uc1\u8220*And where is thy master\uc1\u8217*s son?\uc1\u8221* And Ziba answered the king, \uc1\u8220*He remains there at Jerusalem, for he thinks, \uc1\u8216*To-day will the house of Israel give me back my father\uc1\u8217*s kingdom.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then said the king to Ziba, \uc1\u8220*All is now yours that belongs to Meribaal.\uc1\u8221* And Ziba said, \uc1\u8220*I do obeisance. Let me find further favor in your sight, my lord, the king.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And when King David came to Bahurim, there came out from there a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei the son of Gera, constantly cursing as he came.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And he cast stones at David and all the officers of King David and at all the people and all the mighty warriors at his right hand and at his left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And thus Shimei said as he cursed, \uc1\u8220*Begone, begone, bloody and vile scoundrel!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Jehovah has brought back upon you all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose place you have reigned; and Jehovah hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom your son; and behold now you are in your misfortune, for you are a bloody man!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Abishai the son of Zeruiah said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over now and take off his head.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But the king said, \uc1\u8220*What have I in common with you, you sons of Zeruiah? If he curses when Jehovah hath said to him, \uc1\u8216*Curse David!\uc1\u8217* then who shall say, \uc1\u8216*Why have you done so?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And David said to Abishai and to all his officers, \uc1\u8220*See, my son who came from my bowels seeks my life; how much more this Benjamite! Let him curse, for Jehovah hath bidden him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Perhaps Jehovah will look on my affliction and repay me good instead of this cursing that he hath sent to-day.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So David and his men went along the way; but Shimei went along on the hillside parallel with him, cursing as he went, and threw stones and continually cast dust at him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the king and all the people who were with him, arrived weary   and he refreshed himself there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And Absalom with all the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel was with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now when Hushai the Archite, David\uc1\u8217*s friend, came to Absalom, Hushai said to Absalom, \uc1\u8220*May the king live, may the king live!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Absalom said to Hushai, \uc1\u8220*Is this your love for your friend? Why did you not go with your friend?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Hushai answered Absalom, \uc1\u8220*No! for whom Jehovah and his people and all the men of Israel have chosen, to him will I belong, and with him will I remain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And in the second place, whom should I serve? Should it not be his son? As I have served your father, so will I serve you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, \uc1\u8220*Give your counsel as to what we shall do.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And Ahithophel said to Absalom, \uc1\u8220*Go in unto your father\uc1\u8217*s concubines whom he has left to keep the palace; and all Israel will hear that you have made yourself abhorrent to your father, and the hands of all who are on your side will be strengthed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So they pitched for Absalom the tent on the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father\uc1\u8217*s concubines in the sight of all Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And the counsel of Ahitophel, which he gave in those days, was regarded as if one inquired of the word of God--so was all the counsel of Ahithophel regarded by David and Absalom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}Moreover Ahithophel said to Absalom, \uc1\u8220*Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David to-night;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}thus I will come upon him when he is tired and weak and will storm him into a panic and all the people who are with him will flee; and I will smite the king alone,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and I will bring back all the people to you .   all the people shall be at peace.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And the advice pleased Absalom, and all the elders of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Absalom Said, \uc1\u8220*Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he has to say.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And when Hushai came to Absalom, Absalom spoke to him, saying, \uc1\u8220*Thus Ahitophel has spoken; shall we act upon his advice? If not, you give advice.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then Hushai said to Absalom, \uc1\u8220*The counsel that Ahithophel has given this time is not good.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Hushai said moreover, \uc1\u8220*You know your father and his men, that they are mighty warriors and of angry temper, like a bear robbed of her cubs in the field. Furthermore your father is a man of war and will not remain at night with the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Even now he has hidden himself in one of the caves or in some other place. And in case some of  fall at the first, whoever hears it will say, \uc1\u8216*There is a slaughter among the people who follow Absalom.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then even he that is valiant, whose heart is like the heart of a lion, will completely lose courage; for all Israel knows that your father is a mighty warrior, and they who are with him are valiant men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But I counsel, Let all Israel be gathered to you, from Dan to Beersheba, as many as the sand that is by the sea, with you yourself marching in the midst of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So shall we come upon him in some place where he has been discovered, and we will light upon him as the dew falls on the ground; and of him and of all the men who are with him there shall not be left even one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But if he has withdrawn into a city, then all Israel will bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it to the valley, until not even a small stone is found there.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, \uc1\u8220*The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel.\uc1\u8221* For Jehovah had ordained to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, in order that Jehovah might bring evil upon Absalom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Hushai said to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, \uc1\u8220*Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now therefore send quickly and tell David, saying, \uc1\u8216*Do not spend this night at the fords of the wilderness, but by all means cross over, lest the king and all the people with him be swallowed up.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying at Enrogel; and a maid-servant was to go and bring them news, and they were to go and tell King David, for they must not be seen to come into the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But a lad saw them, and told Absalom. Then they both went away quickly and entered into the house of a man in Bahurim, who had a well in his court into which they descended.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And the woman took and spread the covering over the mouth of the well, and strewed dried fruit upon it, so that nothing was known.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And when Absalom\uc1\u8217*s servants came to the woman to the house and said, \uc1\u8220*Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?\uc1\u8221* the woman answered them, \uc1\u8220*They are gone over the water brook.\uc1\u8221* And when they had sought and could find nothing, they returned to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But as soon as they had gone away they came up out of the well, and went and told King David and said to David, \uc1\u8220*Arise, cross quickly over the water for thus has Ahitophel counselled in regard to you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then David and all the people who were with him arose and they crossed over the Jordan. By daybreak there was not one left behind who had not gone over the Jordan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But when Ahitophel saw that his counsel had not been carried out, he saddled his ass and arose, and went to his house, to his city. And when he had given command concerning his house, he strangled himself, and he died and was buried in his father\uc1\u8217*s sepulchre.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over the Jordan, together with all the men of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And Absalom set Amasa over the army in the place of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of , who had come in marriage to , the sister of Zeruiah, Joab\uc1\u8217*s mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And Israel and Absalom encamped in the land of Gilead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}{This verse will need special attention.} But when David came to Mahanaim, Shobi the son of Nahash of the Ammonite Rabbah, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}brought couches, rugs, bowls, and earthen vessels, and wheat, barley, meal, parched grain, beans, lentils,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}honey, curds, sheep, and calves for David, and for the people who were with him, to eat; for they thought, \uc1\u8220*The people are hungry and weary and thirsty in the wilderness.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}Then David mustered the people who were with him, and appointed over them commanders of thousands and of hundreds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And David  the people into three divisions, one third was under the command of Joab, another third under Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab\uc1\u8217*s brother, and another third under the command of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the people, \uc1\u8220*I also will surely go out with you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}{This verse will need special attention.} But the people said, \uc1\u8220*You shall not go out; for if we flee away, no one will care for us, or if half of us die, no one will care for us, for you are equal to ten thousand of us. Also it is now better for you to be ready to help us from the city.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And the king said to them, \uc1\u8220*I will do what you think best!\uc1\u8221* So the king stood by the side of the gate, while all the people went out by hundreds and by thousands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the king commanded Joab, and Abishai, and Ittai, saying, \uc1\u8220*Deal gently for my sake with the young man, with Absalom!\uc1\u8221* And all the people heard when the king gave all the commanders the order regarding Absalom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So the people went out into the field against Israel. And the battle was in the forest of Ephraim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And the people of Israel were smitten there before the servants of David, so that the slaughter on that day was great--twenty thousand men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And the battle was spread out over the whole country; and the forest devoured more that day than the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Absalom happened to meet the servants of David. And Absalom was riding upon his mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak and his head caught fast in the oak, and he was  between heaven and earth, while the mule that was under him went on.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And when a certain man saw it, he told Joab and said, \uc1\u8220*Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in an oak.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then Joab said to the man who told him, \uc1\u8220*So you saw him! Why did you not smite him there to the ground? And my part would have been to give you ten shekels of silver and a girdle.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But the man said to Joab, \uc1\u8220*If I were to feel the weight of a thousand shekels of silver in my hand I would not put forth my hand against the king\uc1\u8217*s son, for in our hearing the king charged you and Abishai and Ittai, saying, \uc1\u8216*Take care of the young man Absalom.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Or if I had treacherously taken his life, nothing would have been hidden from the king, and you yourself would have stood aloof.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Joab answered, \uc1\u8220*I will not tarry thus with you.\uc1\u8221* And he took three  in his hand, and thrust them into Absalom\uc1\u8217*s heart, while he was still alive in the midst of the oak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And ten young men who bore Joab\uc1\u8217*s armor gathered about and smote Absalom and put him to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing Israel; for Joab held back the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And they took Absalom and cast him into the great pit in the forest, and raised over him a heap of stones. And all Israel fled each to his home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But Absalom had already in his lifetime taken and reared up for himself the pillar which is in the King\uc1\u8217*s Dale; for he said, \uc1\u8220*I have no son to keep my name in remembrance; and he named the pillar after his own name. Therefore it is called \uc1\u8216*Absalom\uc1\u8217*s Monument,\uc1\u8217* to this day.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But when Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said, \uc1\u8220*Let me now run and bring the news to the king that Jehovah has pronounced judgment for him against his enemies.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Joab said to him, \uc1\u8220*You are not the man to bring news to-day. On another day you may bring news, but not to-day, for the king\uc1\u8217*s son is dead.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then said Joab to the Cushite, \uc1\u8220*Go, tell the king what you have seen.\uc1\u8221* And the Cushite bowed before Joab and ran off.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said yet again to Joab, \uc1\u8220*However it may be, I would like also to run after the Cushite.\uc1\u8221* And Joab said, \uc1\u8220*Why is it that you would run, my son, seeing that no reward will be paid out?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And he said, \uc1\u8220*However it may be, I would like to run.\uc1\u8221* So he said to him, \uc1\u8220*Run.\uc1\u8221* Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Plain of the Jordan and outran the Cushite.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Now David was sitting between the two gates; and the watchman had gone up to the roof of the gate by the wall. And when he lifted up his eyes and looked, he saw there a man running alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then the watchman cried and told the king. And the king said, \uc1\u8220*If he be alone, good news are in his mouth.\uc1\u8221* And he kept coming and was drawing near,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}when the watchman saw another man running; and the watchman called toward the , and said, \uc1\u8220*See, another man running alone!\uc1\u8221* And the king said, \uc1\u8220*He also is bringing good news.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And the watchman said, \uc1\u8220*I see that the running of the first is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.\uc1\u8221* And the king said, \uc1\u8220*He is a good man and comes with good news.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then Ahimaaz drew near and said to the king, All is well. And he bowed before the king with his face to the earth, and said, Blessed be Jehovah your God, who hath delivered up the men who lifted up their hand against my lord the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Is it well with the young man Absalom?\uc1\u8221* And Ahimaaz answered, \uc1\u8220*When Joab sent , I saw a great tumult, but I did not learn what it was.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And the king said, \uc1\u8220*Turn aside and stand here\uc1\u8221*, and he turned aside and stood still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And, just then, the Cushite said, \uc1\u8220*Let my lord the king receive the good news that Jehovah hath pronounced judgment for you this day upon all those who rose up against you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And the king said to the Cushite, \uc1\u8220*Is it well with the young man Absalom?\uc1\u8221* And the Cushite answered, \uc1\u8220*May the enemies of my lord the king and all who rise up against you for evil be as that young man!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then the king was greatly moved and went up to the chamber over the gate and wept.And thus he said, as he kept on weeping, \uc1\u8220*My son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! O that I had died instead of you, Absalom, my son, my son!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}And it was told Joab, \uc1\u8220*The king is weeping and lamenting for Absalom.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So for all the people the victory that day was turned to mourning, since the people heard that day, \uc1\u8220*The king is grieving for his son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore the people stole away into the city, as people who are ashamed when they have fled in battle steal away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the king covered his face, and cried aloud, \uc1\u8220*My son Absalom, Absalom, my son, my son!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Joab came to the king in the palace and said, \uc1\u8220*You have to-day shamed the face of all your servants, who have saved your life and the lives of your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your concubines,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}by loving them who hate you and hating them who love you. For you declared to-day that princes and brave officers are nothing to you, for now I know if Absalom had lived and all of us had died to-day, then you would be pleased.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now therefore come, go forth, and reassure your followers; for I swear by Jehovah, if you do not go forth, not a man will remain to you, and that will be worse for you than all the evil that has befallen you from your youth until now.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And the rumor spread among all the people, \uc1\u8220*See the king is sitting in the gate\uc1\u8221*; and all the people came before the king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Now Israel had fled every man to his tent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, \uc1\u8220*The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, he saved us out of the hand of the Philistines, but now he has fled out of the land from Absalom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, has fallen in battle. Now therefore why do you say nothing about bringing the king back?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then King David commanded Zadok and Abiathar the priests, \uc1\u8220*Speak to the elders of Judah, saying, \uc1\u8216*Why are you the last to bring the king back to his palace?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
And the word of all Israel came .{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*You are my bone and my flesh, why then are you the last to bring back the king?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Say to Amasa, \uc1\u8216*Are you not my bone and my flesh? God do to me whatever he will, if you shall not henceforth be commander of the army before me in the place of Joab,\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And he turned the heart of all the men of Judah as one man, so that they sent to the king, saying, \uc1\u8220*Return with all your servants.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the king returned, and arrived at the Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal to meet the king and bring him across the Jordan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And Shimei the son of Gera the Benjamite, who was of Bahurim, hastened down with the men of Judah to meet King David,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}with a thousand men of Benjamin; and with him was Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, with his fifteen sons and his twenty servants; and they dashed into the Jordan before the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}{This verse will need special attention.} And they kept crossing the ford to bring over the king\uc1\u8217*s household and to do what would please him. Meanwhile Shimei the son of Gera prostrated himself before the king, when he was about to cross the Jordan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And he said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Let not my lord consider me guilty nor remener what your servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For your servant knows that I have sinned; therefore, see, I have come down first of all the house of Joseph to meet my lord the king.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But Abishai the son of Zeruiah spoke and said, \uc1\u8220*Should not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s anointed?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But David said, \uc1\u8220*What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah, that you should this day oppose me? Should anyone be put to death to-day in Israel?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And the king said to Shimei, \uc1\u8220*You shall not die.\uc1\u8221* And the king swore it to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And Meribaal the son of Saul came down to meet the king; and he had neither dressed his feet not trimmed his beard nor washed his clothes from the day the king departed until the day he came home safe and sound.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And so when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him, \uc1\u8220*Why did you not go out with me, Meribaal?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And he answered, \uc1\u8220*My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for your servant said, \uc1\u8216*Saddle me an ass, on which I may ride and accompany the king, because your servant is lame.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But he has slandered your servant to my lord the king. My lord the king is as a Messenger of God; do therefore what seems good to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For though all my father\uc1\u8217*s house were only deserving of death before my lord, the king set your servant among those who eat at your table. What right have I now, that I should continue to cry to the king?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And the king said to him, \uc1\u8220*Why do you continue to speak? I say, you and Ziba divide the land.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And Meribaal said to the king, \uc1\u8220*rather let him take all, inasmuch as my lord the king has come home safe and sound.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}{This verse will need special attention.} Then Barzillia the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and he went over the Jordan with the king to bid him good-by at the Jordan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Now Barzillai was a very aged man, eighty years old, and he had provided the king with food while he remained at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And the king had said to Barzillai, \uc1\u8220*Come over with me, and I will support you  with me in Jerusalem.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But Barzillai said to the king, \uc1\u8220*How many years have I still to live, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}I am now eighty years old. Can I distinguish good from evil? Can your servant taste what I eat or what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? Why then should your servant be a burden to my lord the king?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Your servant would merely go over the Jordan with the king, and why should the king give me this recompense?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Only let your servant return, I pray you, that I may die in my own city, by the grave of my father and my mother. But there is your servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and treat him as shall seem good to you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And the king answered, \uc1\u8220*Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him as you would desire; and whatever you shall request of me, that will I do for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Then all the people went over the Jordan. The king also  kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; so he returned to his home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}And the king passed by Gilgal, Chimham being with him; and all the people of Judah were escorting the king, and also half the people of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Therefore all the men of Israel came to the king, and said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Why have our clansmen, the men of Judah, stolen you away, and brought the king and his household over the Jordan, when all of David\uc1\u8217*s men are his people?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Then all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, \uc1\u8220*Because the king is near of kin to us. Why are you angry at this thing? Have we eaten anything at the king\uc1\u8217*s cost? or has he been carried away by us?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, \uc1\u8220*I have ten shares in the king, ; why then did you despise me? And was not our advice first to bring back the king? But the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}Now there chanced to be there a vile scoundrel, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite. He blew on a trumpet and cried,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
We have no share in David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And we have no claim in the son of Jesse!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Each to his tents, O Israel!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So all the men of Israel ceased to follow David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri; but the men of Judah remained loyal to their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And when David came to his palace at Jerusalem, he took care of his ten concubines, whom he had left to take charge of the palace, and put them in a guarded house and supported them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut in until the day of their death, .
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the king said to Amasa, \uc1\u8220*Summon in my name the men of Judah within three days, and also be present yourself.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So Amasa went to summon Judah. But when he delayed longer than the time which David had appointed him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}David said to Abishai, \uc1\u8220*Now will Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom; take your lord\uc1\u8217*s servants, and pursue after him, lest he find for himself fortified cities and escape out of our sight.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So there went out after ,  and the Cherethites and Pelethites, and all the mighty heroes. They set out from Jerusalem to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}{This verse will need special attention.} When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. And Joab was girt with a sword under his warrior\uc1\u8217*s cloak, and also over it was a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in its sheath; and as he went forth it fell out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Joab said to Amasa, \uc1\u8220*Is it well with you, my brother?\uc1\u8221* And Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Amasa did not notice the sword that was in Joab\uc1\u8217*s hand; so he smote him with it in the body, and shed his bowels to the ground, and he did not strike a second blow; but he died. And Joab and Abishai his brother pursued Sheba the son of Bichri.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And one of Joab\uc1\u8217*s young men stood by him and said, Whoever favors Joab and is for David, let him follow Joab.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in the middle of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he carried Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a garment over him, inasmuch as he saw that every one who came to him stood still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}{This verse will need special attention.} But he passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel-beth-maacah. And all the Bichrites gathered together, and entered also after him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And they came and besieged him in Abel-beth-maacah, and they cast up a mound against the city, and it stood even with the wall; and all the people with Joab were devising how to throw down the wall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then a wise woman out of the city, cried, \uc1\u8220*Hear, hear! Say, I pray, to Joab, \uc1\u8216*Come near that I may speak with you.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And he came near her; and the woman said, \uc1\u8220*Are you Joab?\uc1\u8221* And he answered, \uc1\u8220*I am.\uc1\u8221* Then she said to him, \uc1\u8220*Hear the words of your maid-servant.\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*I am listening.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then she spoke, saying, \uc1\u8220*They used to say formerly, \uc1\u8216*Let them ask in Abel and \uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I am of those who are peaceful and faithful in Israel. You seek to destroy a city and a mother in Israel; why will you consume the inheritance of Jehovah?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And Joab answered and said, \uc1\u8220*Far be it, far be it from me, that I should consume or destroy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}That is not at all our errand. But a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, has lifted up his hand against the king, even against David; only deliver him, and I will leave the city.\uc1\u8221* And the woman said to Joab, \uc1\u8220*Behold his head shall be thrown to you over the wall.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then the woman went  all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri and threw it out to Joab. So he blew the trumpet, and they were dispersed from the city, each to his home. And Joab returned to the king at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now Joab was over all the host of Israel; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and  was in charge of the forced labor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and Sheva was scribe; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Ira the Jairite was also a priest of David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}Now in the days of David there was a famine three years, year after year. And when David sought the face of Jehovah, Jehovah said, Upon Saul and upon , because he put to death the Gibeonites,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}(now the Gibeonites were not of the Israelites, but of the remnant of the Amorites; nevertheless the Israelites had sworn to them; and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal for the Israelites and the Judahites),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and David said to the Gibeonites, \uc1\u8220*What shall I do for you? And wherewith shall I make the expiation, that you may bless the heritage of Jehovah?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And the Gibeonites said to him, \uc1\u8220*It is not a matter of silver and gold between us and Saul or his house; neither is it for us to put any man to death in Israel.\uc1\u8221* And he said, \uc1\u8220*What do you say that I shall do for you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And they said to the king, \uc1\u8220*The man who consumed us, and who planned   that we should not remain in any of the borders of Israel--{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}let seven men of his sons be given to us, and we will hang them up to Jehovah in .\uc1\u8221* And the king said \uc1\u8220*I will give them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But the king spared , the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, because of Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s oath which was between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Meribaal, and the five sons of  the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And he delivered them over the Gibeonites, and they hung them in the mountain before Jehovah, so that the seven of them fell together; and they were put to death in the first days of .
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of the barley harvest until water was poured upon them from heaven; and she did not permit the birds of the heavens to settle down upon them by day nor the wild beasts by night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And when it was reported to David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh in Gilead, who had stolen them from the citizens of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them, on the day that the Philistines slew Saul in Gilboa.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And he brought up from there the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son and they gathered the bones of those who were hanged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And thy burried the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son in the territory of Benjamin in Zela in the sepulchre of Kish his father, and they did all that the king commanded. And after this God was propitiated toward the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Now when the Philistines were again at war with Israel, David went down together with his servants  and fought against the Philistines.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}{This verse will need special attention.} Then there arose Dodo, who was one of the descendants of the giants, the weight of whose bronze spear was about twelve pounds of brass, being girded with the sword, and thought to slay David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succored him and smote and killed the Philistine. Then the men of David swore, saying, \uc1\u8220*You shall go out no more with us to battle, that you may not quench the lamp of Israel.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now when after this there was again war with the Philistines at Gob, Sibbecai the Hushathite slew Saph, who was one of the descendants of the giants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}{This verse will need special attention.} And when there was again war with the Philistines at Gob, Elhanan the son of Jair the Bethlehemite, slew Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver\uc1\u8217*s beam.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And there was again war at Gath, where was a man of gigantic stature, who had on each hand six fingers and on each foot six toes; and he also was descended from the giants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimei, David\uc1\u8217*s brother, slew him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}These four were descended from the giants in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}And David spoke unto the {\scaps Lord } the words of this song in the day that the {\scaps Lord} delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and he said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The God who is my rock, in Him I take refuge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My shield, and my horn of salvation, my high tower, and my refuge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My savior, Thou savest me from violence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Praised, I cry, is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I am saved from mine enemies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For the waves of death compassed me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The floods of Belial assailed me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The cords of Sheol surrounded me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The snares of Death confronted me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In my distress I called upon the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, I called unto my God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And out of his temple He heard my voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And my cry did enter into His ears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the earth did shake and quake,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The foundations of heaven did tremble;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
They were shaken, because He was wroth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Smoke arose up in His nostrils,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And fire out of His mouth did devour;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Coals flamed forth from Him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He bowed the heavens also, and came down;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And thick darkness was under His feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And He rode upon a cherub, and did fly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, He was seen upon the wings of the wind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And He made darkness pavilions round about Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Gathering of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}At the brightness before Him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Coals of fire flamed forth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} thundered from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And the Most High gave forth His voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And he sent out arrows, and scattered them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Lightning, and discomfited them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the channels of the sea appeared,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The foundations of the world were laid bare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
By the rebuke of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
At the blast of the breath of his nostrils.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He sent from on high, He took me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He drew me out of many waters;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}He delivered me from mine enemy most strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
From them that hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They confronted me in the day of my calamity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But the {\scaps Lord} was a stay unto me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He brought me forth also into a large place;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He delivered me, because He delighted in me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The {\scaps Lord} rewarded me according to my righteousness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
According to the cleanness of my hands He recompensed me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For I have kept the ways of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And have not wickedly departed from my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For all his ordinances were before me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And I was single-hearted toward Him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I kept myself from mine iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Therefore hath the {\scaps Lord} recompensed me according to my righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
According to my cleanness in his eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}With the merciful Thou dost show Thyself merciful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
With the upright man Thou dost show Thyself pure;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And with the crooked Thou dost show Thyself subtle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And the afflicted people Thou dost save;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But Thine eyes are upon the haughty, that Thou mayest humble them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For Thou art my lamp, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And the {\scaps Lord} doth lighten my darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For by Thee I run upon a troop;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
By my God do I scale a wall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}As for God, His way is perfect;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The word of the {\scaps Lord} is tried;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He is a shield unto all them that take refuge in Him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For who is God, save the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And who is a Rock, save our God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The God who is my strong fortress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And who letteth my way go forth straight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Who maketh my feet like hinds\uc1\u8217*,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And setteth me upon my high places;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Who traineth my hands for war,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
So that mine arms do bend a bow of brass.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Thou hast also given me Thy shield of salvation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And Thy condescension hath made me great.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Thou hast enlarged my steps under me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And my feet have not slipped.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Neither did I turn back till they were consumed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}And I have consumed them, and smitten them through, that they cannot arise;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, they are fallen under my feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For Thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Thou hast also made mine enemies turn their backs unto me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, them that hate me, that I might cut them off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}They looked, but there was none to save;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Even unto the {\scaps Lord}, but He answered them not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I did stamp them as the mire of the streets, and did tread them down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Thou also hast delivered me from the contentions of my people;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thou hast kept me to be the head of the nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A people whom I have not known serve me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}The sons of the stranger dwindle away before me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
As soon as they hear me, they obey me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}The sons of the stranger fade away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And come halting out of their close places.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The {\scaps Lord} liveth, and blessed be my Rock;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And exalted be the God, my Rock of salvation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Even the God that executeth vengeance for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And bringeth down peoples under me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yea, Thou liftest me up above them that rise up against me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Thou deliverest me from the violent man.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Therefore I will give thanks to Thee, O {\scaps Lord}, among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And I will sing praises unto Thy name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}A tower of salvation is He to His king;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And showeth mercy to His anointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
To David and to his seed, for evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Now these are the last words of David:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The saying of David the son of Jesse,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And the saying of the man raised on high,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The anointed of the God of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And the sweet singer of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The spirit of the {\scaps Lord} spoke by me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And His word was upon my tongue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The God of Israel said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The Rock of Israel spoke to me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Ruler over men shall be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The righteous, even he that ruleth in the fear of God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A morning without clouds;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When through clear shining after rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The tender grass springeth out of the earth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For is not my house established with God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For an everlasting covenant He hath made with me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ordered in all things, and sure;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For all my salvation, and all my desire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Will He not make it to grow?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But the ungodly, they are as thorns thrust away, all of them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For they cannot be taken with the hand;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But the man that toucheth them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Must be armed with iron and the staff of a spear;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And they shall be utterly burned with fire in their place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}{This verse will need special attention.} These are the names of David\uc1\u8217*s mighty heroes: Ishbaal the Hachmonite, leader of the Three; he swung his spear over eight hundred slain at one time.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And next to him among the three mighty heroes was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the . He was with David at Pasdammim when the Philistines gathered there for battle. But when the Israelites retreated,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}he stood up and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary and clave fast to the sword. Thus Jehovah brought about a great deliverance that day; and the people returned after him only to take spoil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And next to him was Shammah the son of Agee, a Hararite. And the Philistines gathered together at Lehi. And there was a plot of ground full of lentils. But when the people fled from the Philistines,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}he stood in the middle of the plot and defended it and slew the Philistines. Thus Jehovah brought about a great deliverance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}{This verse will need special attention.} And three of the Thirty went down, and came to the rock to David to the stronghold of Adullam, while the force of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was in Bethlehem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And David longed and said, \uc1\u8220*O that one would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the three famous warriors broke though the camp of the Philistines and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took and brought it to David; he would not drink of it, however, but poured it out to Jehovah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And he said, \uc1\u8220*Jehovah forbid that I should do this. It is the blood of the men who went at the risk of their lives. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And Abishai, the brother of Joab the son of Zeruiah, was leader of the Thirty. And he swung his spear over three hundred slain, so that he was renowned among the Thirty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He was honored more than the Thirty, so that he became their commander, but he did not attain to the Three.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done great deeds; he slew the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And he slew a  Egyptian, who had a spear in his hand, but he went down to him with a club and snatched the spear out of the Egyptian\uc1\u8217*s hand and slew him with his own spear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he was renowned among the thirty mighty heroes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He was honored more than the Thirty, but he did not attain to the Three. And David set him over his body-guard.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the Thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh, the Tekoite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Abiezer the Anathothite,  the Hushathite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Heled the son of Baanah, the Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the Benjamites,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Benaiah a Pirathonite,  of the brooks of Gaash,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31} the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Eliahba the Shaalbonite, , Jonathan,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33} Shammah, the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Ararite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the Maacathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel, the Gilonite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Hezro the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the armor bearers of Joab the son Zeruiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Uriah the Hittite--in all thirty-seven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}Then Jehovah\uc1\u8217*s anger was again aroused against Israel, and he instigated David against them, saying, \uc1\u8220*Go number Israel and Judah!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So the king said to Joab and the  of the army who  with him, \uc1\u8220*Go now about among all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, and muster the people that I may know the number of the people.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Joab answered the king, \uc1\u8220*May Jehovah your God add to the people, a hundred times as many as they are, while the eyes of my lord the king are looking on! But why has my lord the king a desire for such a thing?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the king\uc1\u8217*s command prevailed against Joab and the commanders of the army. And Joab and the commanders of the army went out from the presence of the king to muster the people of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And they crossed the Jordan, and  that is in the midst of the torrent valley, towards Gad and on to Jazer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then they came to Gilead and to the land of the ; and they came to  they went around to Sidon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and came to the fortress of Tyre and all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites; and they went out to the South Country of Judah at Beersheba.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So when they had gone about through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Joab gave to the king the number of the people who had been mustered, and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand able-bodied, fighting men; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then David\uc1\u8217*s conscience smote him after he had numbered the people. And David said to Jehovah, \uc1\u8220*I have sinned greatly in what I have done. But now, O Jehovah, pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So when David rose up in the morning, then the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Gad, David\uc1\u8217*s seer, saying,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*Go and speak to David, \uc1\u8216*Thus saith Jehovah, \uc1\u8220*Three things I offer thee; choose one of them, that I may do it to thee.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Gad came to David and told him, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Shall  years of famine come over your land? Or will you flee three months before your foes, while they pursue you? Or shall there be three days\uc1\u8217* pestilence in your land? Now take counsel and consider what answer I shall return to him who sent me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And David said to Gad, \uc1\u8220*I am in a great strait. We would rather fall into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercy is great, but let me not fall into the hand of man.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So  of the people from Dan to Beersheba seventy thousand men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And when the Messenger stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, Jehovah repented of the evil, and said to the Messenger who was destroying the people, \uc1\u8220*Enough, now stay thy hand!\uc1\u8221* and the Messenger of Jehovah was by the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And David spoke to Jehovah when he saw the Messenger who smote the people, and said, \uc1\u8220*See I have sinned and have acted wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray, be against me, and my father\uc1\u8217*s house.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And Gad came that day to David, and said to him, \uc1\u8220*Go up, rear an altar to Jehovah on the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So David went up at the command of Gad, as Jehovah commanded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And when Araunah looked down and saw the king and his servants crossing over to him, Araunah went out and bowed before the king with his face to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And Araunah said, \uc1\u8220*Why has my lord the king come to his servant?\uc1\u8221* And David said, \uc1\u8220*To buy the threshing-floor of you, to build an altar to Jehovah, that the plague may be averted from the people.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And Araunah said to David, \uc1\u8220*Let my lord the king take and offer what he pleases, the oxen for the burnt-offering, and the threshing-sledges and the implements of the oxen for the wood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}All this has y king, given to the king.\uc1\u8221* And Araunah said to the king, \uc1\u8220*Jehovah your God accept you!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And the king answered Araunah, \uc1\u8220*No, but I will surely buy it of you at a price. I must not offer burnt-offerings to Jehovah my God which cost me nothing.\uc1\u8221* So David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then David built there an altar to Jehovah, and offered burnt-offerings. So Jehovah was entreated for the land and the plague was averted from Israel.
\par}

}