{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Verdana;}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Psalms (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs60 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Psalms
 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Book One

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 1 \uc1\u8211* The Way of Happiness

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 1}Happy are those
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}who do not follow the counsel of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
not halting in ways frequented by sinners,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor taking a seat in a gathering of scoffers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}But the law of the {\scaps Lord} is their joy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they study it day and night.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}They are like trees
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
planted by runlets of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yielding fruit in due season,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
leaves never fading.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
In all that they do, they prosper.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Not so fare the wicked, not so;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like chaff are they, blown by the wind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}So the wicked will not stand firm in the judgment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor sinners appear, when the righteous are gathered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For the way of the righteous is dear to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the way of the wicked will end in ruin. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 2 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Chosen King

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 2}Why this turmoil of nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}this futile plotting of peoples,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}with kings of the earth conspiring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rulers consulting together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against the {\scaps Lord} and against his anointed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}to snap their bonds
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fling their cords away?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He whose throne is in heaven laughs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} mocks them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then he speaks to them in his wrath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in his hot anger confounds them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*This my king is installed by me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on Zion my holy mountain.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I will tell of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s decree.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He said to me: \uc1\u8220*You are my son,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
this day I became your father.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Only ask, and I make you the heir of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lord of the world to its utmost bounds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You will break them with sceptre of iron,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shatter them like pottery.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}So now, you kings, be wise:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be warned, you rulers of earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Serve the {\scaps Lord} in awe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
kiss his feet with trembling,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}lest, angry, he hurl you to ruin;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for soon will his fury blaze.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Happy all who take refuge in him. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 3 \uc1\u8211* A Morning Prayer for Protection

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David, when he fled from his son Absalom.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 3}How many, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, are my foes!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Those who rise up against me are many.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Many are those who say of me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*There is no help for him in his God.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}But you, {\scaps Lord}, are shield about me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my glory, who lifts up my head.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}When loudly I call to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from his holy hill he gives answer. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I laid down and slept:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
now I wake, for the {\scaps Lord} sustains me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I fear not the myriads of people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who beset me on every side.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Arise, {\scaps Lord}: save me, my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who strikes all my foes on the cheek,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shatters the teeth of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Victory belongs to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let your blessing descend on your people. {\i Selah} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 4 \uc1\u8211* An Evening Prayer

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader, with stringed instruments. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 4}Answer my cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}God, my defender.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Often from straits you have brought me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to spacious places.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
So now show me your favor
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hear my prayer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}How long, you proud people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will my honor be stained
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
by the slanders you love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the lies that you follow? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}See! The {\scaps Lord} has shown me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his wonderful kindness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} hears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I call to him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Sin not in your anger:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but speak in your heart
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on your bed, and be still. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Offer true sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
trust in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Many are longing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for fortune to smile.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Lift upon us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the light of your face.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}You have put in my heart, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a deeper joy
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
than was theirs who had corn
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wine in abundance.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}So in peace I will
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lie down and sleep;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for you, {\scaps Lord}, keep me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
safe. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 5 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Guidance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader: A psalm of David, to be accompanied by the flute.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 5}Hear my words, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give heed to my whisper.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Attend to my loud cry for help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my king and my God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When I pray to you, {\scaps Lord}, in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hear my voice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I make ready for you in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and look for a sign.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For you are no God who takes pleasure in wickedness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no one of evil can be your guest.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}No braggarts can stand in your presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you hate all workers of wrong.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}You destroy all speakers of lies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
people of blood and deceit you abhor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But I, through your kindness abundant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may enter your house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and towards the shrine of your temple
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may reverently bow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Lead me, {\scaps Lord}, in your righteousness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of my enemies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Make your way level before me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For their mouth is a stranger to truth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their heart is a pit of destruction.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Their throat is a wide open grave,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their tongue the smooth tongue of the hypocrite.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Condemn them, God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let their schemes bring them down to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For their numberless crimes thrust them down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for playing the rebel against you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But let all who take refuge in you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
ring out their gladness forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Protect those who love your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so they may exult in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For you give your blessing, {\scaps Lord}, to the godly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the shield of your favor protects them. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 6 \uc1\u8211* A Cry for Help in Time of Trouble

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; with instrumental music on the sheminith. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 6}Rebuke me not, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, in your anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
punish me not in your wrath.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Lord}, be gracious to me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in my weakness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Heal me {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for racked is my body;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}all of me utterly racked.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Why do you wait so long, {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Turn, {\scaps Lord}, rescue me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
save me, because of your love.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For in death none can call you to mind;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in Sheol who can praise you?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I am so weary of sighing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
All the night I make my bed swim,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wet my couch with my tears.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}My eyes swollen with grief;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from weeping caused by my foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Begone, workers of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} has heard my loud weeping,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}the {\scaps Lord} has heard my entreaty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} accepts my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}My foes will be stricken with terror,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
brought to shame and dismay in a moment. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 7 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer to the God of Justice

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A Shiggaion of David, which he sang to the }{\scaps {\cf1 7}Lord} about Cush, the Benjamite.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} my God, I take refuge in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Deliver me, save me from all who pursue me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}or like lions they will tear me to pieces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rend me, past hope of rescue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, my God, if my life has been such
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
if my hands have been stained with guilt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}if friends I paid back with evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
if I plundered my foes without cause,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}may the enemy chase and find me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 trample my life to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my honor leave in the dirt! {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Arise, {\scaps Lord}, in anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against my foes rise in fury.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Awake for my help:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let justice be done.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Gather the nations about you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sit on your lofty throne,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}as the {\scaps Lord}, the judge of the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Judge me, {\scaps Lord}, in my innocence
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and according to my integrity.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Put an end to the wrong of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
protect the righteous.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Searcher of hearts and minds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
righteous God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}God is my shield:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he saves the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}God is a just judge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
constant in righteous anger.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}He will sharpen his sword without fail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his bow is bent and ready,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}his deadly weapons are ready,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his arrows he makes of flame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The enemy who conceives evil;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pregnant with mischief,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
giving birth to lies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}a pit they have made and dug;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but into the hole that they made they will fall.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}On their own heads their mischief comes back;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on their own skulls their violence comes down.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}I will give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sing to the name of the {\scaps Lord} Most High. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 8 \uc1\u8211* God\uc1\u8217*s Glory in Nature

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader: A psalm of David, to be accompanied by a stringed instrument.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\cf1 8}Lord}{\super\cf2\fs24 1} our God!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How glorious in all the earth is your name!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your praise reaches as high as the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}from the mouths of children and infants.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You have built a fortress
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
against your enemies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to silence the foe and the rebel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When I look at your heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the work of your fingers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the moon and the stars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which you have set there,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}what are mortals,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you think of them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
humans,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you visit them?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Yet you made them little less than divine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
crowned them with glory and majesty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}made them lord of the works of your hands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
put all things under their feet \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}sheep and oxen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all of them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the wild beasts also:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}birds of the air,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fish of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all that crosses the paths of the ocean.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Lord} our God!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How glorious in all the earth is your name! 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 9 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Praise the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Justice

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; \uc1\u8217*almuth labben. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 9}With all my heart I will praise the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all your wonders I will rehearse.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I will rejoice and exult in you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
singing praise to your name, Most High;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}because backward my foes were turned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they stumbled and perished before you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My right and my claim you have upheld,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did sit on the throne as a fair judge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}rebuking the nations, destroying the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and blotting their name out forever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The foe is vanished, ruined forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their cities destroyed, their memory perished.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}See! The {\scaps Lord} is seated forever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the throne he established for judgment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}ruling the world with justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and judging the nations with equity.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}So the {\scaps Lord} proves a haven to the oppressed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a haven in times of trouble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Well may they trust you who know your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for those who seek you, you never abandon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Sing praise to the {\scaps Lord}, whose home is in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
declare his deeds among the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}As avenger of blood, he keeps them in mind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he does not forget the cry of the wretched.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Show me favor, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
see how my foes afflict me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lift me up from the gates of death;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}so I may, in your help exulting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tell forth your praise at the gates of Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The nations are sunk in the pit which they made,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the net that they hid, their own foot is entangled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} is revealed in the judgment he wrought,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the wicked are snared in their own handiwork. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Let the wicked depart to Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the nations that live forgetful of God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}For the needy will not be always forgotten,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the hope of the helpless be lost forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Arise, {\scaps Lord}; don\uc1\u8217*t let them triumph:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before your face let the nations be judged.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Strike them with fear, {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
show the nations how frail they are. {\i Selah} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 10 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Help

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 10}Why do you stand, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, so far away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hiding yourself in times of trouble?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The wicked, in their pride, are pursuing the helpless:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let them be caught in the schemes they have plotted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For the wicked boasts of their wanton greed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the robber despises the {\scaps Lord}, and curses him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}in wicked pride, thinks:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God doesn\uc1\u8217*t care,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God doesn\uc1\u8217*t call to account.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Never a season that they do not prosper;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your judgments are far above out of their sight:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they scoff at their foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Each says in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I will never be shaken;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will live for all time
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
untouched by misfortune.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Their mouths are full of deceit and oppression:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
under their tongues lurks mischief and wrong.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Lying in secret in some village ambush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stealthily watching, they murder the innocent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Like a lion that lurks in a secret lair
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they lurk intending to catch the defenceless;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to seize them, to drag them away in their net.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Their victims are crushed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sink down to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Under their claws
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hapless fall.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The wicked say in their hearts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that God has forgotten,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
has hidden his face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will see nothing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Arise, {\scaps Lord}, lift up your hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do not forget the cry of the wretched.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Why do the wicked treat God with contempt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and say in their hearts, \uc1\u8220*God doesn\uc1\u8217*t care\uc1\u8221*?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}You have seen the trouble and sorrow;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you mark it all, and will take it in hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The hapless can count on you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
helper of orphans.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Break the arm of the wicked and evil:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
search out their sin, till no more be found.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} is king forever and ever:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the nations will vanish from his land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Lord}, you have heard the desire of the humble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
inclining your ear, strengthening their hearts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}rights you have won for the crushed and the orphan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so no one on earth may strike terror again. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 11 \uc1\u8211* Trust in the Lord

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 11}In the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} I take refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How can you tell me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to flee like a bird to the mountains?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*See! The wicked are bending the bow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their arrow is set on the string,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to shoot from the shadows at the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}In this tearing down of foundations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what good can a good person do?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} in his holy temple,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} in heaven, enthroned.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His eyes watch the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they see everyone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} examines the righteous and wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the lover of violence he hates.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}On the wicked he rains coals of fire and brimstone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their drink will be scorching wind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For the {\scaps Lord} is just, and justice he loves;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so the upright will see his face. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 12 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Faithful in a False World

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; on the sheminith. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 12}Help, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, for the good are all gone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
faithful people have vanished.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}One lies to another, speaking empty lies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with flattering lips and false hearts they speak.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}May the {\scaps Lord} cut off all the flattering lips,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the tongue that utters arrogance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}they declare, \uc1\u8220*Our tongue is our strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our allies our lips: who is lord over us?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*The poor are despoiled, and the needy are sighing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so now I will act,\uc1\u8221* the {\scaps Lord} declares
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*And place them in the safety they long for.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The words of the {\scaps Lord} are words that are pure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
silver smelted, seven times refined.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}You will keep us, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and guard us from this generation forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}in a world where the wicked prowl,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and worthless people exalted. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 13 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Help in Trouble

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 13}How long, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, will you forget me forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How long will you hide your face from me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}How long must I nurse grief inside me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in my heart a daily sorrow?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How long are my foes to exult over me?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Look at me, answer me, {\scaps Lord} my God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Fill my eyes with your light,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lest I sleep in death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}lest my enemies claim to have triumphed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lest my foes rejoice at my downfall.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But I trust in your kindness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my heart will rejoice in your help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I will sing to the {\scaps Lord} who was good to me. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 14 \uc1\u8211* The Folly of Denying God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 14}Fools say in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}\uc1\u8220*There is no God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Vile, hateful their life is;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one does good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}From heaven the {\scaps Lord} looks out
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on humans, to see
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
if any are wise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and care for God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}But all have turned bad,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the taint is on all;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
not one does good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no, not one.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Have they learned their lesson,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those workers of evil?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who ate up my people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
eating, devouring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
never calling to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Sore afraid will they be;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for God is among
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those who are righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}you may mock the plans of the poor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} is their refuge.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}If only help from Zion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
would come for Israel!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When the {\scaps Lord} brings his people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a change of fortune,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
how glad will be Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel how joyful! 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 15 \uc1\u8211* Standing Firm

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\cf1 15}Lord}{\super\cf2\fs24 1}, who can be guest in your tent?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who may live on your holy mountain?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The person whose walk is blameless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose conduct is right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose words are true and sincere;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}on whose tongue there sits no slander,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who will not harm a friend,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}nor cruelly insult a neighbor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who regards with contempt those rejected by God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but honors those who obey the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who keeps an oath, whatever the cost,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}whose money is lent without interest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and never takes a bribe to hurt the innocent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The person who does these things will always stand firm. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 16 \uc1\u8211* The Joy of Fellowship with God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A michtam of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 16}Keep me, O God, for in you I take refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I said to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8220*You are my {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
my happiness rests in you alone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Those who are holy in the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they, they alone, are the noble ones;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all my delight is in them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Those who choose other gods
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
find endless sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In their offerings of blood I will have no part
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor take their name on my lips.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} is my share and my portion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my fate is in your strong hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The boundary lines of my life
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mark out delightful country,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my heritage pleases me well.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I praise the {\scaps Lord} for his counsel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which so stirs my heart in the night.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I keep the {\scaps Lord} always in mind:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with him at my hand, I can never be moved.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}So my heart is glad, there is joy inside me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in safety of body I live.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For you will not give me up to Sheol
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor let any who love you see the pit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You will show me the path that leads to life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to that fulness of joy which is in your presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the pleasures dispensed by your hand evermore. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 17 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A prayer of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 17}Listen, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, to my innocence;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
attend to my piercing cry.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Give heed to my prayer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
out of lips unfeigned.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Let my vindication come from you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your eyes see the truth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When you test my heart when you visit at night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and assay me like silver \uc1\u8211* you can find no evil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am determined that my mouth should not lie.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I gave earnest heed to the words of your lips.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}My steps have held fast to the paths of your precepts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in your tracks have my feet never stumbled.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}So I call you, O God, with assurance of answer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bend down your ear to me, hear what I say.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Show your marvelous love, you who save from enemies
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those who take refuge at your right hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Keep me as the apple of the eye,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hide me in the shelter of your wings.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}From wicked people who do me violence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from deadly foes who crowd around me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}They have closed their hearts to pity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the words of their mouths are haughty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Now they dog us at every step,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
keenly watching, to hurl us to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}like a lion, longing to tear,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a young lion, lurking in secret.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Arise, {\scaps Lord}, face them and fell them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
By your sword set me free from the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}by your hand, O {\scaps Lord}, from those \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose portion of life is but of this world.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But let your treasured ones have food in plenty
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
may their children be full and their children satisfied.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}In my innocence I will see your face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
awake I am filled with a vision of you. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 18 \uc1\u8211* A King\uc1\u8217*s Song of Gratitude

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David, the servant of the }{\scaps {\cf1 18}Lord}, who recited the words of this song to the {\scaps Lord} after the {\scaps Lord} had saved him from the power of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. He said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 1}I love you, O {\scaps Lord}, my strength.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} is my rock, my fortress, deliverer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God, my rock, where I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my shield, my defender, my tower.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Worthy of praise is the {\scaps Lord} whom I call on,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rescues me from all my foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The waves of death broke about me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fearful floods of chaos.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Sheol threw cords around me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
snares of death came to meet me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}In distress I cried to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shouted for help to my God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in his temple he heard my voice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
into his ears came my cry.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Then the earth shook and quaked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mountains trembled to their foundations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and quaked because of his wrath.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Smoke went up from his nostrils,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
devouring fire from his mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
coals were kindled by it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Then he bent the sky and came down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thick darkness was under his feet.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}He rode on a cherub and flew,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
darting on wings of wind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}with his screen of darkness about him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in thick dark clouds of water.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}At the radiance before him there passed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hailstones and coals of fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} thundered from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Most High uttered his voice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}He shot his arrows and scattered them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
flashed lightnings, and routed them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The channels of the sea were revealed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world was laid bare to its base,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
at your rebuke, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the blast of the breath of your nostrils.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}He stretched from on high, he seized me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
drew me up from the mighty waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}and saved me from those who hated me \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fierce foes, too mighty for me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}In my day of distress they assailed me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} proved my support.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}To a spacious place he brought me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and, for love of me, he saved me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} repays my innocence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rewards my cleanness of hands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}For I kept the ways of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor have wickedly strayed from my God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}His commandments were all before me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his statutes I put not away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}And I was blameless before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
guarding myself from sin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}So the {\scaps Lord} repaid my innocence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my cleanness of hands in his sight.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}With the loyal you are loyal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with the blameless blameless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}With the pure you show yourself pure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but shrewd with the devious.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}For the lowly people you save,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but haughty eyes you abase.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}You are my lamp, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God who enlightens my darkness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}With you I can storm a rampart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with my God I can leap a wall.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}As for God, his way is perfect;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the word of the {\scaps Lord} is pure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He is shield to all who take refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}For who is God but the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And who is a rock but our God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}The God who arms me with strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who cleared and smoothed my way.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}He made my feet like hinds\uc1\u8217* feet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and set me up on the heights.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}He taught my hands how to fight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my arms how to bend a bronze bow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}The shield of your help you gave me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your right hand supports me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you stoop down to make me great.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}In your strength I took giant strides,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my feet never slipped.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}So I chased the foe till I caught them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turned not, till I made an end of them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}I smashed them, they could not rise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they fell beneath my feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}You did arm me with strength for war,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did bow my assailants beneath me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}You made my foes turn their back to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those who did hate me I finished.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}They cried for help, but none saved them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the {\scaps Lord}, but he answered them not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}I beat them like dust of the market-place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
stamped them like mud of the streets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}From the strife of the peoples you saved me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you made me head of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
peoples I knew not did serve me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 44}On the instant they hear, they obey me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
foreigners come to me cringing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 45}Foreigners lose courage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and come out of their strongholds trembling.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 46}The {\scaps Lord} is alive! Blest be my rock!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Exalted be God, my protector!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 47}The God who gave me revenge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and brought down nations beneath me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 48}who saved me from angry foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and set me above my assailants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
safe from the violent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 49}For this I will praise you among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
making music, O {\scaps Lord}, to your name:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 50}for great triumphs he grants to his king,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and faithful love he shows his anointed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to David and his seed evermore. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 19 \uc1\u8211* The Glory of God in the Heavens

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 19}The heavens declare God\uc1\u8217*s glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}the sky tells what his hands have done.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Day tells it to day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
night reveals it to night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}without speaking, without words;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
without the sound of voices.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But through all the world their voice carries
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their words to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He has pitched a tent for the sun in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}it comes out like a bridegroom from his bridal chamber,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it joyfully runs its course like a hero.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}From one end of the heavens it rises,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and around it runs to the other,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and nothing hides from its heat.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 In Praise of the Law

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The law of the {\scaps Lord} is perfect,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
renewing life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The decrees of the {\scaps Lord} are trusty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
making the simple wise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The behests of the {\scaps Lord} are right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
rejoicing the heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The command of the {\scaps Lord} is pure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
giving light to the eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The fear of the {\scaps Lord} is clean,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s judgments are true
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and right altogether.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}More precious are they than gold \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than fine gold in plenty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and sweeter they are than honey,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that drops from the comb.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}By them is your servant warned;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who keeps them has rich reward.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Who can know their flaws?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Absolve me from those I know not.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Keep your servant from wilful sins \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from falling under their sway:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then blameless and clear will I be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from great offense.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}May the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be pleasing to you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my rock and redeemer. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 20 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 20}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} answer you in the day of distress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the name of the Jacob\uc1\u8217*s God protect you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}sending you help from the temple,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
out of Zion supporting you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}All your meal-offerings may he remember,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your burnt-offerings look on with favor. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}May he grant you your heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bring all your plans to pass.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}We will shout then for joy at your victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rejoice in the name of our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
May the {\scaps Lord} grant your every request.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Now I am sure that the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will help his anointed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From his temple in heaven he will answer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by his mighty triumphant right hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Some in chariots are strong, some in horses;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but our strength is the {\scaps Lord} our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}They will totter and fall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while we rise and stand firm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Give victory, {\scaps Lord}, to the king,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and answer us when we call. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 21 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer after a Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 21}The king rejoices, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, in your might,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how he exults because of your help!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}You have granted to him his heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have not withheld his lips\uc1\u8217* request. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}You came to meet him with rich blessings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you set on his head a golden crown.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He asked you for life, you gave it \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
many long days, forever and ever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Great is his glory because of your help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
honor and majesty you lay upon him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For you make him most blessed forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you make him glad with the joy of your presence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For the king puts always his trust in the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Most High, in his love, will preserve him unshaken.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Your hand will reach all your foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your right hand, all who hate you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You will make them like a furnace of fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when you appear, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} will swallow them up in his wrath.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The fire will devour them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}You will sweep their offspring from the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their children from humanity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}When they scheme against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hatch evil plots \uc1\u8211* they will fail.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For you aim your bow at their faces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make them turn in flight.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Be exalted, {\scaps Lord}, in your strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to your might we shall sing and make music. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 22 \uc1\u8211* The Sufferer\uc1\u8217*s Triumph

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; set to \uc1\u8216*Deer of the Dawn\uc1\u8217*. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 22}My God, my God, why have you left me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}my rescue so far from the words of my roaring?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I cry in the day, you do not answer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I cry in the night but find no rest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}You are the Holy One,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
throned on the praises of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}In you our ancestors trusted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they trusted and you delivered them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They cried to you, and found safety,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in you did they trust and were not put to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}But I am a worm, not a person;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
insulted by others, despised by the people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}All who see me mock me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with mouths wide open and wagging heads:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*He relies on the {\scaps Lord}; let him save him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let him rescue the one he holds dear!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}But you drew me from the womb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
laid me safely on my mother\uc1\u8217*s breasts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}On your care was I cast from my very birth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you are my God from my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Be not far from me, for trouble is nigh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and there is none to help.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I am circled by many bulls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beset by the mighty of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}who face me with gaping jaws,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like ravening roaring lions.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Poured out am I like water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all my bones are loosened.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
My heart is become like wax,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
melted within me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}My palate is dry as a sherd,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my tongue sticks to my jaws;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the dust of death you lay me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For dogs are round about me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a band of knaves encircles me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
gnawing my hands and my feet.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}I can count my bones, every one.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
As for them, they feast their eyes on me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}They divide my garments among them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and over my raiment cast lots.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}But you, O {\scaps Lord}, be not far,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O my strength, hasten to help me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Deliver my life from the sword
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my life from the power of the dogs.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Save me from the jaws of the lion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the horns of the wild oxen help me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}I will tell of your fame to my kindred,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in the assembly will praise you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, you who fear him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
All Jacob\uc1\u8217*s seed, give him glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
All Israel\uc1\u8217*s seed, stand in awe of him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}For he has not despised nor abhorred
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the sorrow of the sorrowful.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He hid not his face from me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but he listened to my cry for help.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Of you is my praise in the great congregation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my vows I will pay before those who fear him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}The afflicted will eat to their heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those who seek after the {\scaps Lord} will praise him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Lift up your hearts forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}All will call it to mind, to the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turn to the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all tribes of the nations will bow down before you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}For the kingdom belongs to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is the {\scaps Lord} of the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}To him will bow down all who sleep in the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and before him bend all who go down to the dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those who could not preserve their lives.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}My descendants will tell of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the next generation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}they will declare his righteousness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to people yet to be born:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He has done it. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 23 \uc1\u8211* The Good Shepherd

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 23}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} is my shepherd: I am never in need.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}He lays me down in green pastures.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He gently leads me to waters of rest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}he refreshes my life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He guides me along paths that are straight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
true to his name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}And when my way lies through a valley of gloom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I fear no evil, for you are with me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your rod and your staff comfort me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}You spread a table for me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in face of my foes;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with oil you anoint my head,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my cup runs over.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Surely goodness and love will pursue me \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the days of my life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In the house of the {\scaps Lord} I will live
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
through the length of the days. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 24 \uc1\u8211* The True Worshipper

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David. A psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 24}The earth is the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}\uc1\u8217*s and all that it holds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world and those who live in it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For he founded it on the seas,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on the floods he sustains it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Who may ascend the hill of the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who may stand in his holy place?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The clean of hands, the pure of heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who sets not their heart upon sinful things,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor swears with intent to deceive:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}they win from the {\scaps Lord} a blessing:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God is their champion and savior.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Such must be those who resort to him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and seek the face of the God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Lords\uc1\u8217*s Triumphal Entry into the Sanctuary

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Lift high your heads, you gates \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Higher, you ancient doors;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
welcome the glorious king.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Who is the glorious king?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} strong and heroic,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} heroic in battle.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Lift high your heads, you gates \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Higher, you ancient doors;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
welcome the glorious king.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*Who is the glorious king?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is the glorious king.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 25 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Forgiveness and Protection

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 25}To you, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, I lift up my heart:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the day I wait for you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In you I trust, put me not to shame;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let not my foes exult over me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}None will be shamed who wait for you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but shame will fall upon wanton traitors.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Make me, O {\scaps Lord}, to know your ways:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
teach me your paths.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}In your faithfulness guide me and teach me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you are my God and my savior.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Remember your pity, O {\scaps Lord}, and your kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for they have been ever of old.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Do not remember the sins of my youth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
remember me in kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of your goodness, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Good is the {\scaps Lord} and upright,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so he teaches sinners the way.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The humble he guides in the right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he teaches the humble his way.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}All his ways are loving and loyal
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to those who observe his charges and covenant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Be true to your name {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
forgive my many sins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Who then is the person who fears the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He will teach them the way to choose.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}They will live in prosperity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their children will inherit the land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} gives guidance to those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with his covenant he makes them acquainted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}My eyes are ever toward the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for out of the net he brings my foot.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Turn to me with your favor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I am lonely and crushed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}In my heart are strain and storm;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bring me out of my distresses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Look on my misery and trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and pardon all my sins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}look on my foes oh, so many!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And their cruel hatred towards me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Deliver me, keep me, and shame not
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
one who takes refuge in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}May integrity and innocence preserve me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I wait for you, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Redeem Israel, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from all its distresses. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 26 \uc1\u8211* Prayer of a Devout Worshipper

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 26}Defend me, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, for my walk has been blameless;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the {\scaps Lord} have I trusted unswervingly:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Examine me, {\scaps Lord}, and test me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
test my heart and my mind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For your love is before my eyes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your faithfulness governs my way.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I never sat down with the worthless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor companied with dissemblers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I hate the assembly of knaves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would never sit down with the wicked;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}but, with hands washed in innocence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would march round your altar, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}singing loud songs of thanks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and telling of all your wonders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}O {\scaps Lord}, I love your house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the place where your glory lives.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Do not gather me up with sinners;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
slay me not with people of blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}whose hands are stained with villainy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and whose right hand is filled with bribes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But my walk is blameless!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O redeem me, be gracious to me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}My foot stands on even ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the choirs I will bless the {\scaps Lord}. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 27 \uc1\u8211* If God is for Me

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 27}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} is my light and my savior;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom then should I fear?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} protects my life;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom then should I dread?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}When the wicked drew near to assail me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and eat up my flesh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it was those who distressed and opposed me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who stumbled and fell.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Though against me a host should encamp,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet my heart would be fearless:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
though battle should rise up against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
still would I be trustful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}One thing have I asked of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that do I long for \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
To live in the house of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the days of my life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to gaze on the grace of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and inquire in his temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For he will hide me in his shelter
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the day of misfortune.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In his sheltering tent he hides me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he lifts me up on a rock.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}And now that my head he has lifted
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
above my encircling foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will march round the altar and sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shouting with joy, in his tent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
making music and song to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Serenity of Faith

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Hear, O {\scaps Lord}, my loud cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and graciously answer me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}My heart has said to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Your face, O {\scaps Lord}, I seek.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Hide not your face from me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
reject not your servant in anger:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you have been my help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Abandon me not, nor forsake me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O God of my help:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}for father and mother have left me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} will take me up.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Teach me your way, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lead me in an even path,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of my enemies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Give me not up, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto the rage of my foes;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for against me have risen false witnesses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
breathing out cruelty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Firm is the faith I cherish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I, in the land of the living,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will yet see the goodness of God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Let your heart be courageous and strong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wait on the {\scaps Lord}. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 28 \uc1\u8211* An Answered Prayer for Help

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 28}Unto you, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, do I cry;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my rock, be not deaf to me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lest, through holding your peace, I become
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like those who go down to the pit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Hear my loud entreaty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as I cry for help to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lifting my hands, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
towards your holy chancel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Take me not off with the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor with the workers of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose speech to their neighbors is friendly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while evil is in their heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Give them as they have done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as their wicked deeds deserve.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
As their hands have wrought, so give to them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
requite to them their deserts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They are blind to all that the {\scaps Lord} does,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to all that his hands have wrought;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and so he will tear them down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to build them up no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Blest be the {\scaps Lord}, who has heard
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my voice as I plead for mercy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} is my strength and my shield;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my heart trusts in him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I was helped: so my heart is exultant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in my song I will praise him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} is the strength of his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the fortress who saves his anointed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}O save your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bless your inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Be their shepherd
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and carry them forever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 29 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Glory in the Storm

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 29}Ascribe to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, you heavenly beings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} glory and power
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} the glory he manifests:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bow to the {\scaps Lord} in holy array.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice peals on the waters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The God of glory has thundered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He peals o\uc1\u8217*er the mighty waters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice sounds with strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice sounds with majesty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice breaks the cedars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he breaks the cedars of Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}making Lebanon dance like a calf,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Sirion like a young wild ox.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice hews out flames of fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice rends the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rends the desert of Kadesh.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice whirls the oaks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and strips the forests bare;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all in his temple say \uc1\u8220*Glory.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} was king at the flood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} sits throned forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} gives strength to his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he blesses his people with peace. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 30 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Thanksgiving for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David. A song for the dedication of the Temple.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 30}I will extol you, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because you have lifted me up,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and not suffered my foes to rejoice over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I cried to you for help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} my God, and you healed me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}You have brought me up, {\scaps Lord}, from Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from my way to the pit back to life you have called me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Sing praise to the {\scaps Lord}, faithful people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give thanks to his holy name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For his anger lasts only a moment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his favor endures for a lifetime.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Weeping may lodge for the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the morning brings shouts of joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}When all went well, I imagined
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that never should I be shaken.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For by your favor, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you had set me on mountains strong:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but you hide your face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I was confounded.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Then to you, {\scaps Lord}, I cried,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the {\scaps Lord} I begged for mercy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8220*What profit is there in my blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
if I go down to the pit?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Can you be praised by dust?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Can it tell of your faithfulness?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Hear, {\scaps Lord}, and show me your favor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\scaps Lord} be a helper to me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You have turned my mourning to dancing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my sackcloth you have unloosed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and clothed me with joy:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}that unceasingly I should sing your praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and give thanks to you, {\scaps Lord} my God, forever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 31 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Troubles

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 31}In you, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, I take refuge;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let me never be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Rescue me in your faithfulness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}incline to me your ear.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Deliver me speedily.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Be to me a rock of defence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a fortified house, to save me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For my rock and my fortress are you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lead me and guide me so your name will be honored.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Draw me out of the net they have hid for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for you yourself are my refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Into your hand I commend my spirit:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you ransom me, {\scaps Lord}, faithful God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I hate those devoted to worthless idols;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I trust in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I will rejoice and be glad in your love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because you have looked on my misery,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cared for me in my distress.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}You have not given me into the enemy\uc1\u8217*s hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have set my feet in a spacious place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Be gracious to me, {\scaps Lord}, for I am distressed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my eye is wasted away with sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For my life is consumed with grief,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my years with sighing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
My strength is broken with misery,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my bones waste away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The scorn of all my foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the butt of my neighbors am I,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a terror to my acquaintance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
At the sight of me in the street
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
people turn quickly away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I am clean forgotten like the dead,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
am become like a ruined vessel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}I hear the whispers of many \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
terror on every side \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
scheming together against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
plotting to take my life.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}But my trust is in you, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*You are my God,\uc1\u8221* I say;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}my times are in your hand, save me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the hand of the foes who pursue me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Make your face to shine on your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
save me in your love.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Put me not, O {\scaps Lord}, to shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I have called upon you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let the wicked be put to shame
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
silent in Sheol.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Strike the false lips dumb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that speak proudly against the righteous
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with haughtiness and contempt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}How great is the goodness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have treasured for those who fear you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and wrought for those who take refuge in you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in plain sight of all!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}In your sheltering wings you hide them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from plottings of people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you keep them safe in a bower
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the chiding of tongues.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Blest be the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the wonderful love he has shown me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in time of distress.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For I had said in panic,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I am driven clean out of your sight.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But you heard my plea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I cried to you for help.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Love the {\scaps Lord}, all you faithful;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} protects the loyal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but repays the haughty in full.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Let your hearts be courageous and strong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you who wait on the {\scaps Lord}. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 32 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer of Confession and Joy

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David. A maskil.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 32}Happy those whose transgression is pardoned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}whose sin is covered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Happy are those, free from falseness of spirit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to whom the {\scaps Lord} reckons no debt of guilt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When I held my peace, my bones wore away
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with my endless groaning;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}for day and night did your hand
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lie heavy upon me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The sap of my life was dried up
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as with fierce summer-heat. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I began to acknowledge my sin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not concealing my guilt;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the moment I vowed to confess
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the {\scaps Lord} my transgression,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then you yourself did pardon
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the guilt of my sin. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For this cause let all who are faithful
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pray to you in the time of distress;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then, when the great waters rush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they will not reach to him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For you are my shelter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you protect me from trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and surround me with deliverance. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*With my eye steadfastly upon you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will instruct and teach you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The way you should go.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Do not be like the horse or the mule,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that have no understanding,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but need bridle and halter to curb them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
else they will not come near to you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The godless have many sorrows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but those who trust in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will be compassed about by his kindness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Be glad in the {\scaps Lord}, and rejoice, you righteous;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ring out your joy, all you upright in heart. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 33 \uc1\u8211* A Hymn of Thanksgiving

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 33}Shout for joy in the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, you righteous:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise for the upright is seemly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} on the lyre,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
play to him on a ten-stringed harp.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Sing to him a new song,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
play skilfully and shout merrily.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For the {\scaps Lord} is straight in his promise;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all that he does is in faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Justice and right he loves;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the earth is full of his kindness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}By his word the heavens were made,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all their host by the breath of his mouth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He gathers the sea in a bottle,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the ocean he puts into store-houses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Let the whole world honor the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let all who live on earth be in awe.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For at his word it came into being,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at his command it stood forth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} frustrates the designs of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what the peoples have purposed, he brings to nought,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}but the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own design will stand forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and what his heart has purposed, through all generations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Happy the nation whose God is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the people he chose for himself as his own.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} looks down from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he sees all of humanity;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}from where he rules he gazes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on all who inhabit the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}He fashions the hearts of them all,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gives heed to all that they do.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}It is not by great armies that kings are victorious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is not by great strength that a warrior saves himself;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}false hope is the war-horse to usher in victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all its great might it can provide no escape.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}See! The eye of the {\scaps Lord} is on those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on those who hope in his kindness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}to deliver their life from death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to keep them alive in famine.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}We wait for the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is our help and our shield.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}For in him our heart is glad,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we trust in his holy name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Let your kindness, O {\scaps Lord}, be upon us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as is our hope in you. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 34 \uc1\u8211* The Lord is Mindful of His Own

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David, when he feigned madness in the presence of Abimelech, who drove him away, and he left.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 34}I will bless the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} at all times,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in my mouth will his praise be forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In the {\scaps Lord} will my heart make her boast,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the humble will hear and be glad.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}O magnify the {\scaps Lord} with me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and let us extol his name together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I sought the {\scaps Lord}, and, in answer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he saved me from all my terrors.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Look to him and you will be radiant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with faces unashamed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Here is one who was crushed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but cried and was heard by the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and brought safe out of every trouble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s angel encamps
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
about those who fear him, and rescues them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}O taste and see that the {\scaps Lord} is good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
happy those who take refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Fear the {\scaps Lord}, all his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for they who fear him lack nothing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Even young lions may be poor and hungry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but those who seek the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will not lack any good thing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Come, children, listen to me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will teach you the fear of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Which of you is desirous of life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
loves many and happy days?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Then guard your tongue from evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your lips from speaking deceit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Depart from evil, and do good;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
seek peace, and pursue it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The eyes of the {\scaps Lord} are towards the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his ears are towards their cry for help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} sets his face against those who do evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to root their memory out of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}When righteous cry, they are heard by the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he saves them from all their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}The {\scaps Lord} is near to the broken-hearted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he helps those whose spirit is crushed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Many misfortunes befall the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} delivers them out of them all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}He guards all their bones,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
none are broken.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Misfortune will slay the ungodly;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those who hate the righteous are doomed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}The {\scaps Lord} ransoms the life of his servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and none will be doomed who takes refuge in him. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 35 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Malicious Foes

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 35}Contend, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, with those who contend with me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do battle with those who do battle with me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Grasp shield and buckler,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rise up as my help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Draw spear and battle-axe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
confront those who pursue me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Assure me that you will help me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Dishonor and shame be on those
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who are seeking my life!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Defeat and confusion on those
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who are planning my hurt!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}As chaff before wind may they be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s angel pursuing them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Slippery and dark be their way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with his angel thrusting them on.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For they wantonly hid their net for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and dug a pit to destroy me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Upon them may ruin come unawares;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
may the net which they hid catch themselves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and into the pit may they fall.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Then I will exult in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and be joyful because of his help;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}and all my being will say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Who, O {\scaps Lord}, is like you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who save the helpless from those too strong for them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the poor and the helpless from those who despoil them?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Violent witnesses rise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ask of me things that I know not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Evil for good they requite me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
leaving me inwardly comfortless.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But when {\i they} were sick, {\i I} put on sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and chastened myself with fasting.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I prayed with head bowed low,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}as if for my friend or my brother.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I went about bowed and in mourning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as one who laments his mother.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}When I stumbled, they gleefully gathered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
strangers gathered around me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tore at me without ceasing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}impiously mocking and mocking,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bearing their teeth at me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}How long, {\scaps Lord}, will you look on?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Rescue me from their roaring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my precious life from the lions.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}I will then give you thanks in the great congregation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and praise you before many people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Suffer not those to rejoice over me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who are falsely my foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
suffer not those who without cause abhor me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to wink with the eye.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}For it is not peace that they speak
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of those who are quiet in the land;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but treacherous charges they plot.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}With wide open mouths they shout,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Hurrah! Hurrah!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
With our own eyes we saw it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}But you have seen, too, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
keep not silence, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be not far from me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Bestir you, awake, for my right
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God, my {\scaps Lord}, for my cause.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}You are just, {\scaps Lord}: win for me justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let them not rejoice over me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}inwardly saying, \uc1\u8220*Hurrah!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The desire of our hearts at last!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Now we have swallowed him up.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Shame and confusion together
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on those who rejoice at my hurt!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Clothed with shame and dishonor
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be those who are haughty to me!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Let such as delight in my cause
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
ring out their gladness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and say evermore,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Great is the {\scaps Lord} whose delight
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the well-being of his servant.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Then my tongue will tell of your justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the day long of your praise. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 36 \uc1\u8211* The Triumphant Power of God\uc1\u8217*s Love

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of the servant of the }{\scaps {\cf1 36}Lord}, of David.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Sin whispers within the heart of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who have no dread of God before their eyes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}It flatters them in their eyes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that their sin will not be found out.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}First, their speech becomes wicked and false,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they give up acting wisely and well.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Then they plot deliberate wrong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
take their stand on the wicked way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
without the least shrinking from evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Your love, O {\scaps Lord}, touches the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your faithfulness reaches the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Your justice is like the great mountains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your judgments are like the broad sea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\scaps Lord}, you save people and animals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}How precious your love, O God!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
All may seek shelter in the shadow of your wings.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}They feast on the fat of your house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they drink of your brook of delights.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For with you is the fountain of life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the light that is yours we see light.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}O continue your grace to the faithful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your love to the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Let no arrogant foot tread upon me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no wicked hand drive me to exile.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}There the workers of wrong lie prostrate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thrust down to rise up no more. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 37 \uc1\u8211* Trust in the Lord and Do Good

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 37}Be not kindled to wrath at the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}nor envious of those who work wrong;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}for, like grass, they will speedily wither,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fade like the green of young grass.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Trust in the {\scaps Lord}, and do good;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
remain in the land, and deal faithfully:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}then the {\scaps Lord} will be your delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will grant you your heart\uc1\u8217*s petitions.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Commit your way to the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
trust in him, and he will act,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}making clear as the light your right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your just cause clear as the noon-day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In silence and patience wait on the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Be not kindled to anger at those who prosper.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
At those who execute evil devices.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Desist from anger, abandon wrath:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be not kindled to anger it leads but to evil:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}for evildoers will be cut off,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the land will be theirs, who wait on the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Yet but a little, and the wicked vanish:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
look at their place: they are there no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But the humble will have the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the rapture of peace in abundance.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The wicked plots against the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 snarls like a wild animal;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}the {\scaps Lord} laughs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for he sees that his day is coming.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The wicked have drawn the sword, and bent the bow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to fell the poor, to slay those who walk uprightly;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}but their sword will pierce their own heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their bows will be broken in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Better is the righteous person\uc1\u8217*s little
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than the wealth of many wicked.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}For the arms of the wicked will be broken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} upholds the righteous.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}The {\scaps Lord} watches over the days of the blameless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their heritage will continue forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}They will not be shamed in the evil time,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the days of famine they will be satisfied.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Because the wicked will perish:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but the foes of the {\scaps Lord}, like a brand in the oven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will vanish, like smoke they will vanish.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}The wicked must borrow and cannot pay back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the righteous is lavish and gives.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For those blest by the {\scaps Lord} inherit the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while those whom he curses will be cut off.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}The {\scaps Lord} supports the steps
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of those with whom he is pleased.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Though they fall, they will not be cast headlong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} holds their hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Never, from youth to age,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have I seen the righteous forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or their children begging bread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}They are ever lavishly lending,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their children are fountains of blessing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Turn away from evil and do good
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you will live in the land forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}For the {\scaps Lord} loves justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he does not forsake his friends.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The unrighteous will be destroyed forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the seed of the wicked will be cut off.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}But the land will belong to the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they will live upon it forever,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}The mouth of the righteous murmurs wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and words of justice are on their tongues.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}The law of their God is in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their steps are never unsteady.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}The wicked watches the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and seeks to put them to death.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}But the {\scaps Lord} leaves them not in their hand:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at their trial they will not be held guilty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}Wait on the {\scaps Lord}, and observe his way:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will lift you to honor the land will be yours,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you will feast your eyes on the doom of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}I have seen the wicked exultant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lifting themselves like a cedar of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}But the moment I passed, they vanished!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I sought for them, but they could not be found.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}Preserve your honor and practise uprightness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for such a person fares well in the end.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}But transgressors will perish together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Cut off are the wicked forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}The righteous are saved by the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who in time of distress is their refuge:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}the {\scaps Lord} helps and rescue them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the wicked he rescues and saves them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because they take refuge in him. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 38 \uc1\u8211* A Confession and Prayer for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A Psalm of David. A lament.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 38}Reprove me not, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, in your anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and chasten me not in your wrath;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}for your arrows have sunk into me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your hand lies heavy upon me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}In my flesh is no soundness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of your anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
no health in my bones,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of my sin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For that my guilt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is gone over my head:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
it weighs like a burden
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
too heavy for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}My wounds stink and fester,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for my foolishness I am tormented.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Bent and bowed am I utterly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the day going in mourning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}My loins are filled with burning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in my flesh is no soundness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I am utterly crushed and numb;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I cry louder than lion roars.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Lord}, you know all that I long for,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my groans are not hidden from you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}My heart is throbbing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my strength has failed me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The light of my eyes \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even it is gone from me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}My dear ones and friends keep aloof,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my neighbors stand afar off.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}They who aim at my life lay their snares,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they who seek my hurt speak of ruin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nursing treachery all the day long.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But I turn a deaf ear and hear not;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the dumb I open not my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I am like one without hearing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with no arguments in my mouth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For my hope, O {\scaps Lord}, is in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You will answer, O {\scaps Lord} my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}when I utter the hope that those
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who made scorn of my tottering feet
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may not rejoice over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}For I am ready to fall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my pain forsakes me never.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}I acknowledge my guilt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I am anxious because of my sin:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}My wanton assailants are strong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those who wrongfully hate me are many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}who render me evil for good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and oppose me, because I make good my goal.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Do not forsake me, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God, be not far from me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Hasten to help me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} my savior. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 39 \uc1\u8211* The Pathos of Life

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 39}I vowed to watch my words,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and sin not with my tongue,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but to put on my mouth a muzzle,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while the wicked were in my presence.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I was silent and dumb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
speechless:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but my pain was stirred up.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}My heart grew hot within me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as I mused, the fire was kindled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till at last the words came to my tongue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Teach me, O {\scaps Lord}, my end,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the sum of my days what it is.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Let me know how transient I am.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}See! My days you have made but a span,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my life is as nothing before you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
It is but as a breath that everyone stands: {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}it is but in mere semblance we walk to and fro,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and all our noise is for nothing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
We heap up, and know not who will gather.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}And now, what wait I for, {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
My hope is in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}From all my transgressions deliver me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make me not the scorn of the fool.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}I am dumb, never opening my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for this is your own doing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Remove your stroke from off me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by the might of your hand I am spent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}When you rebuke someone to punish their sins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you consume, like a moth, what they treasures.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Everyone is only a breath. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Hear my prayer, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
attend to my cry for help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Hold not your peace at my tears.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For I am but a guest of yours,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a stranger visiting, like all my ancestors.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Look away from me, let me smile again,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before I die and am gone. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 40 \uc1\u8211* Thanksgiving and Petition

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 40}For the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} I waited and waited,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till, inclining to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he heard my cry.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}From the horrible pit he drew me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
up out of the miry clay;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he set my feet on a rock,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my steps he made firm.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He put a new song in my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of praise to our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Many see it, and, filled with awe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
put their trust in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Happy the person who has put
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the {\scaps Lord} their trust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
not looking to false gods
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or turning to idols.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}With us you have wrought in rich measure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your marvels and purposes for us \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
none may compare with you \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
were I to declare or to tell them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
past counting are they.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}In offerings bloody or bloodless
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have no delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but with open ears you have made me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Burnt-offering and offering for sin
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are not what you ask.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Then said I, \uc1\u8220*Here I am,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the roll of the book has enjoined.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}My delight, O God, is to do your will,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your law is within my heart.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Well, O {\scaps Lord}, you know
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that, with lips unrestrained,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your righteousness I told
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the great congregation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}not hiding it in my heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have told of your steadfast help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the great congregation I hid not
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your love and your faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}So do not restrain, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your pity from us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Your love and your faithfulness \uc1\u8211* ever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may they be our shield.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For evils that cannot be numbered
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have compassed me round.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
My transgressions have followed me up \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I can bear it no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They are more than the hairs of my head,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my heart has forsaken me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}O {\scaps Lord}, be pleased to deliver me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
haste to my help, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}May those who are seeking my life
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be ashamed and confounded together;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
may those who delight in my hurt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be defeated and brought to dishonor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}May those who hurrah over me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be dumbfounded because of their shame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}But may all who seek after you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
rejoice and be glad in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
May all those eager for your aid,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
say, \uc1\u8220*Great is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8221* evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}I am weak and needy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet the {\scaps Lord} cares for me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You are my help and deliverer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
don\uc1\u8217*t delay, my God. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 41 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Healing and Vindication

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 41}Happy are those who consider the weak;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}in the day of misfortune the {\scaps Lord} will deliver them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}He will keep them safe, happy, and long in the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and not give them up to the rage of their foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} will sustain them on bed of languishing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tending their sickness, as long as they lie.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For this cause I say, \uc1\u8220*{\scaps Lord}, show me your favor;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
heal me, because I have sinned against you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}My enemies speak of me nothing but evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*When will he die, and his name pass away?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}When one comes to see me, their words ring hollow;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their heart keeps gathering mischief the while;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and when they go out, they give it speech.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In secret they whisper together against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all those who hate me plot evil against me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Some fatal disease has fastened upon him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and now that he lies, he will rise up no more.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}My most trusted friend, on whom I relied,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who ate of my bread, has turned against me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}But do you, {\scaps Lord}, graciously raise me up,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may pay them their due reward.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}By this will I know you delight in me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
if my foes may not shout over me in triumph.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For my innocence you uphold me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and set me forever before your face.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, the God of Israel,}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i from everlasting to everlasting,}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i Amen and Amen.} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Book Two

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 42 \uc1\u8211* Yearning for God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A maskil of the Korahites.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 42}Like the hart which longs
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}for brooks of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I long
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you, God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I thirst for God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for my living God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When shall I enter in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and see the face of God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}My tears have been my food
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by day and by night;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for they say to me all the day long,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Where is your God?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My heart floods with sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as I call to mind:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
how I used to pass on with the throng,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at their head, to the house of God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with glad shouts and giving of thanks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the throng who kept festival.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Why am I downcast?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Why this moaning within me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Hope in God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for yet will I praise him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my help, my God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I am sunk in my misery;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will therefore call you to mind
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from the land of Jordan and Hermon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the mountain Mizar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Flood is calling to flood
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the noise of your cataracts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all your waves and your breakers
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have passed over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}In the day I cry to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to summon his kindness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the song that I sing in the night
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is a prayer to the living God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}I say to God my rock,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Why have you forgotten me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Why must I walk so sadly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so hard pressed by the foe?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}It pierces me to the heart
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to hear the enemy\uc1\u8217*s taunts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as all the day long they say to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Where is your God?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Why am I downcast?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Why this moaning within me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Hope in God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for yet will I praise him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my help, my God. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 43 \uc1\u8211* Plea for Help

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 43}Right me, defend my cause
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}against a pitiless people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From the crafty and crooked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O God, deliver me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For you are God my protector:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
why have you cast me off?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Why must I walk so sadly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so hard pressed by the foe?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Send forth your light and your truth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let them be my guides:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to your holy hill let them bring me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the place where you live.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Then will I go to God\uc1\u8217*s altar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to God my rejoicing;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and with joy on the lyre I will praise you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O God, my God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Why am I downcast?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Why this moaning within me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Hope in God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for yet will I praise him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my help, my God. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 44 \uc1\u8211* A Lament in Defeat

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of the Korahites. A maskil.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 44}O God, we have heard with our ears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}all our ancestors have told us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
of the work that you wrought in their day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your wonders in days of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}uprooting and crushing the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then planting and settling them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For it wasn\uc1\u8217*t their own sword that won them the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}it was not their own arm that brought them the victory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Yours was the hand and the arm,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yours was the face that shone on them with favor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}It was you, my king and my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that ordained the victories of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Through you we can thrust back our foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and by your name tread down our assailants:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}for not in my bow do I trust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor can my sword win me the victory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Our victory comes from you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and confusion to those who hate us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}In God we boast all the day long,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your name will we praise forever. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Yet you have spurned and disgraced us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in not going forth with our armies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}and in making us flee from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so that those who hated us plundered us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You have let us be eaten like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have scattered us over the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}sold your people for a pittance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and getting no gain from their price.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}You have made us the butt of our neighbors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the derision and scorn of all round us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}O\uc1\u8217*er the world you have made us a byword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the nations at us shake their heads.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}My disgrace is forever before me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my face is covered with shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}at the words of blasphemer and scoffer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the sight of the foe and the vengeful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}All this has come upon us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet we have not forgotten you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor falsely dealt with your covenant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Our heart has not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor our steps declined from your way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}that you thus should have crushed us down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and covered us over with gloom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the place where the jackals roam.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Had we forgotten the name of our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or stretched out our hands to a god that was strange,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}would God not have searched this out?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
For he knows the heart and its secrets.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}But in your cause it is we are killed all the day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and counted as sheep for the slaughter.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Rouse yourself, why do you sleep Lord?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Awake, cast us not off forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Why do you hide your face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
forgetting our stress and our misery?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}For we have sunk down to the dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our bodies cling to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Arise, come to our help:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for your love\uc1\u8217*s sake, ransom us. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 45 \uc1\u8211* Song for the Marriage of a King

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; on shoshannim. Of the Korahites. A maskil. A love song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 45}My heart is astir with beautiful words:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}I will sing a song, concerning the king,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with tongue like the pen of a ready writer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Your beauty is more than mortal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
grace is shed over your lips:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
therefore God has blessed you forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Warrior, strap your sword on your thigh.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
What glory and splendor!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Good fortune attend you, as forth you ride
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in the cause of good faith, and as champion of justice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
May your arm instruct you in deeds of dread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Sharp are your arrows; nations fall under you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pierced to the heart are the foes of the king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Your throne shall endure for ever and ever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your royal sceptre a sceptre of equity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Right you love and wrong you hate:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
therefore the {\scaps Lord} your God anoints you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
With oil of gladness above your fellows.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}With myrrh, aloes, and cassia your robes are all fragrant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you are gladdened by music of ivory harps.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}King\uc1\u8217*s daughters stand ready with jewels for you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at your right hand the queen in gold of Ophir.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Listen, daughter, and see; and incline your ear:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
forget your folk and your father\uc1\u8217*s house.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}And when the king desires your beauty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bow to him, for he is your lord.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}So shall the Tyrians come with gifts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the richest of people will do you homage.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The king\uc1\u8217*s daughter is glorious altogether,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with dress of pearls inwrought with gold.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}In many-coloured robes she is led to the king,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the virgin companions she brought in her train.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The king\uc1\u8217*s palace they enter with joy and rejoicing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}May sons of yours take the place of your fathers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom you will make princes in all the land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Your name will I celebrate world without end,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so that nations shall praise you for ever and ever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 46 \uc1\u8211* Our God is a Mighty Fortress

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of the Korahites, on alamoth. A song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 46}God is our refuge and strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}a very present help in trouble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}So we have no fear, though earth should change,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the hills totter into the heart of the ocean.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Let its waters roar and foam,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
On our side is the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our sure defence is the God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}A river there is, whose streams make glad
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God\uc1\u8217*s city, the home the Most High has hallowed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}God is within her: she cannot be shaken.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God helps her at the turn of the morning.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Nations roared, kingdoms tottered:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he uttered his voice, earth melted away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}On our side is the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our sure defence is the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Come and see what the {\scaps Lord} has done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
working appallingly in the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}He stills wars to the ends of the earth \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
breaking the bow, snapping the spear,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
burning the chariots in the fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*Refrain; and know surely that I am God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
high over the nations, high over the world.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}On our side is the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our sure defence is the God of Jacob. {\i Selah} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 47 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Universal Sovereignty

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 47}Clap your hands, all you peoples:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}shout to God in ringing cries.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For the {\scaps Lord} is most high and dread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a great king over all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He subdues the peoples under us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the nations under our feet;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}he chooses our heritage for us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the glory of Jacob whom he loves. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}God is gone up with a shout,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} with the sound of a trumpet.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Sing praise to our God, sing praises:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sing praise to our king, sing praises.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For king of all earth is he:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise God in a skilful song.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}God is king over all the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God sits on his holy throne.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Princes of nations gather
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the people of Abraham\uc1\u8217*s God:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the shields of the earth are God\uc1\u8217*s;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
greatly exalted is he. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 48 \uc1\u8211* The Marvelous Deliverance of Zion

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song. A psalm of the Korahites.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 48}Great is the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} and worthy all praise
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the city of our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His holy mountain, {\super\cf2\fs24 2}that rises so fair,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the joy of all the world.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Like the mount of the gods is Mount Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the city of the great king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Once God made himself known
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the defence of her palaces.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For see! A concert of kings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
passed over the frontier together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But one glance, and they were astounded;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they hastened away in dismay.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Trembling took hold of them there,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the pains of a woman in labor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}They were shattered, as east wind shatters
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the giant ships in pieces.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}What we heard, we now have seen
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the city of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the city of our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God will uphold her forever. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}We think, O God, of your love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the midst of your temple.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Your fame, O God, like your name, shall extend
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Victory fills your hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Let mount Zion be glad;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
let the daughters of Judah rejoice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of your judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Walk about Zion, go round her;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
count her towers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Set your mind on her ramparts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
consider her palaces;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that you tell to the next generation
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}That such is God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
our God he it is who shall guide us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for ever and ever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 49 \uc1\u8211* The Problem of the Prosperity of the Wicked

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 49}Hear this, you peoples all;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}give ear, all you who live in the world
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}people of low degree and high,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the rich and the poor together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}My mouth shall utter wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the thoughts of a seeing heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I incline my ear to a proverb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the lyre I will open my riddle.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Why should I be afraid in the days of misfortune,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when circled by wicked and cunning foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}who put their trust in their wealth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and boast of their boundless riches?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For assuredly no one can ransom themselves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or give to God the price of their life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}for the ransom of a life is costly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no payment is ever enough,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}to keep them alive for ever and ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so as never to see the pit at all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}But see it they will. Even wise people die,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the fool and the brutish perish alike,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and abandon their wealth to others.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The grave is their everlasting home,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the place they shall live in for ever and ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
though after their own names they called whole lands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Despite their wealth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they perish like dumb animals.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}This is the fate of the confident fool,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the end of those who are pleased with their portion. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Like sheep they descend to Sheol
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with Death for their shepherd;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
down they go straight to the grave,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their form wastes away in their home below.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}But God will assuredly ransom my life
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the hand of Sheol;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for he will receive me. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}So be not afraid when someone grows rich,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when the wealth of their house increases.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Not a shred of it all can they take when they die,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wealth cannot follow them down.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Though they count themselves happy, when they are alive,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and win praise from many for faring so well,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}they must join their ancestors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who see the light nevermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The wealthy are without understanding,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they perish like dumb animals. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 50 \uc1\u8211* True Worship

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 50}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} God has spoken: He summons the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from sunrise to sunset.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}From Zion, perfection of beauty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God\uc1\u8217*s glory shines forth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Our God comes, he cannot keep silence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
devouring fire is before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and furious tempest around him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He summons the heavens above
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the earth to judge his people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Gather to him his saints
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by covenant-sacrifice bound to him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}that the heavens may declare his justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for a God of justice is he. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*Hear, O my people, and I will speak,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and protest to you, O Israel:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I am the {\scaps Lord}, your God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Not for your sacrifices will I reprove you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your burnt-offerings are ever before me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Not a bullock will I take from your house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor he-goats out of your folds;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}for all beasts of the forest are mine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the kine on a thousand hills.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I know all the birds of the air,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all that moves on the fields is mine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Were I hungry, I would not tell you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the world and its fulness are mine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Am I such as to eat bulls\uc1\u8217* flesh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or drink the blood of goats?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Offer to God a thank-offering,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pay the Most High your vows.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Summon me in the day of distress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will rescue you, so will you honor me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}But to the wicked God says:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*What right have you to talk of my statutes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or take my covenant into your mouth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}while you yourself hate correction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cast my words behind you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}When you see a thief, you run with them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with adulterers you keep company.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}You let your mouth loose for evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your tongue contrives deceit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}You shamefully speak of your kin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and slander your own mother\uc1\u8217*s son.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}And because I kept silence at this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did take me for one like yourself.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
But I will convict you and show you plainly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8220*Now you who forget God, mark this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lest I rend you, past hope of deliverance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Those who bring a thank-offering honor me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but to those: who follows my way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will show the salvation of God.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 51 \uc1\u8211* God be Merciful to Me, the Sinner

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet come to him after he had been with Bathsheba.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 51}In your kindness, O God, be gracious to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}in your own great pity blot out my transgressions.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Wash me clean of my guilt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make me pure of my sin.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For well I know my transgressions,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my sin is ever before me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Against you, only you, have I sinned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and done that which is wrong in your sight:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you therefore are just when you speak,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and clear when you utter judgment.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}See! In guilt was I brought to the birth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in sin did my mother conceive me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}It\uc1\u8217*s the innermost truth you desire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give me therefore true wisdom of heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Purge me clean with hyssop,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wash me whiter than snow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Fill me with joy and gladness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the bones you have broken rejoice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Hide your face from my sins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and blot out my guilt altogether.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Create me a clean heart, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
put a new steadfast spirit within me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Cast me not forth from your presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
withdraw not your holy spirit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Give me back the joy of your help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with a willing spirit sustain me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}I will teach your ways to transgressors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sinners shall turn to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Save me from blood, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my tongue shall ring out your faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Open my lips, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my mouth shall declare your praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For in sacrifice you have no pleasure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in gifts of burnt-offering no delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The sacrifice pleasing to God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is a spirit that is broken;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a heart that is crushed, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you will not despise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Do good in your pleasure to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
build the walls of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Then will you welcome the due forms of sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
then on your altars shall bullocks be offered. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 52 \uc1\u8211* The Doom of Arrogance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A maskil of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul that David had gone to Abimelech\uc1\u8217*s house.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 52}Why glory in mischief, you hero?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}God\uc1\u8217*s kindness is all the day.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Engulfing ruin you plot,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your tongue like a razor sharpened,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you practiser of deceit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Evil, not good, you love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and falsehood, not words of truth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But you love all words that devour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a tongue that is given to deceit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But God, on his part, shall destroy you forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
grasp you and pluck you out of your tent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and root you out of the land of the living. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Smitten with awe at the sight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the righteous shall laugh at you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*Look\uc1\u8221* (they will say) \uc1\u8220*at the hero
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who did not make God his stronghold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but trusted in his great wealth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in the strength of his riches.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But I am like a fresh olive-tree
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the house of God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I trust in the kindness of God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for ever and evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}I will render you thanks for ever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for what you have done.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will tell how good you are
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the presence of those who love you. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 53 \uc1\u8211* The Folly of Denying God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On mahalath. A maskil of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 53}Fools say in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}\uc1\u8220*There is no God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Vile, hateful their life is;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one does good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}From heaven God looks out
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on humans, to see
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
if any are wise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and care for God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}But all have turned bad,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the taint is on all;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
not one does good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no, not one.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Have they learned their lesson,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those workers of evil?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Who ate up my people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
eating, devouring,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
never calling to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Sore afraid will they be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where no fear was;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when God scatters the bones
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the godless people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They will be put to shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when God rejects them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}If only help from Zion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
would come for Israel!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
When God brings his people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a change of fortune,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
how glad will be Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Israel how joyful! 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 54 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Oppression

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. With stringed instruments. A maskil of David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, \uc1\u8216*David is in hiding among us\uc1\u8217*.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 54}Save me, O God, by your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}by your power secure for me justice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Listen, O God, to my prayer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give ear to the words of my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For proud men have risen against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and terrible men seek my life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
men who do not set God before them. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But see! God is my helper,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} is sustaining my life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Let their evil fall back on my foes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cut them off in your faithfulness, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Then will I bring you glad sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praising your gracious name;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}for from all distress you have saved me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and feasted my eyes on my foes. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 55 \uc1\u8211* Betrayed by a Friend

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. With stringed instruments. A maskil of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 55}Listen, God, to my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Don\uc1\u8217*t hide yourself from my pleading.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Hear me, and answer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for bitter is my lament.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I am wild with the noise of the foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the clamor of the ungodly;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for they hurl disaster upon me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and attack me with fury.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My heart shudders within me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
terrors of deaths press on me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}fear and trembling attack me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and horror wraps me round.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}O for the wings of a dove:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would fly away and rest.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I would wander far away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
find refuge in the wilderness. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I would find myself a shelter
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from raging wind and tempest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Confuse them, {\scaps Lord}, upset their plans;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I see violence and strife in the city.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}By day and by night they make their rounds
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the city walls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
while within is crime and trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}within is ruin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Her market-place is never free
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of deceit and tyranny.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Treacherous Friend

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The taunts were not those of a foe
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I could have borne;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the disdain was not that of an enemy
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I could have shunned them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}but it was you, my equal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my dear and familiar friend.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}We used to be so close,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
together we walked in God\uc1\u8217*s house with the crowd.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}May death suddenly take them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may they go down to Sheol alive,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for evil lives in their homes and their hearts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}But I will call on God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} will save me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Evening and morning and noon
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I lament and moan.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will hear my voice;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}though I am attacked by many
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he will rescue me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unharmed from the war.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}God, who sits on his ancient throne
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will hear and will humble them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for they never change,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they never fear God. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}My friend turned against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
betrayed his word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}His mouth was smoother than butter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but war filled his heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His words were softer than oil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but sharper than swords.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Cast your burden on the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he will sustain you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will never let the righteous
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be shaken.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}But you, God, will hurl them down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the deepest pit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Bloody and treacherous people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will not live out half their days;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I will trust you. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 56 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer of Trust in God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On jonath elem rehokim. Of David. A michtam, when the Philistines seized him in Gath.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 56}O God, be gracious to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}for people trample upon me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the day righting and pressing me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}All the day enemies trample me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
many there be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who contend with me bitterly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}In the day of my terror
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I trust in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}In God I maintain my cause,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in God I fearlessly trust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
What can flesh do to me?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They torture me all the day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they ceaselessly plan to hurt me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}banded together in secret,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
watching my every step,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as those who hope for my death.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Pay them out for their sin, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hurl down the strong in your anger.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}You yourself count my wanderings.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Put in your bottle my tears
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are they not in your book?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Then shall my foes be turned back
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the day that I call.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Of this I am sure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because God is for me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}In God I maintain my cause,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the {\scaps Lord} I maintain my cause.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}In God I fearlessly trust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what can people do to me?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Your vows are upon me, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will render thank-offerings to you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}because you have saved me from death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my feet from stumbling,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to the end that I walk before God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the light of the living. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 57 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Protection from Persecution

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Al tashheth. A michtam of David, when he fled from Saul into a cave.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 57}Be gracious, O God, be gracious to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}for in you I take shelter.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In your sheltering wings I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till ruin be over past.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I cry to the Most High God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the God who accomplishes for me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He will send me his succour from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will thrust away those who would trample me. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}In the midst of lions I lie,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who devour human prey.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Their teeth are spears and arrows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their tongue is a sharpened sword.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Be exalted, God, o\uc1\u8217*er the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your glory o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}They set a net for my feet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but in it was their own foot caught.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Before me they dug a pit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but they fell into it themselves. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}My heart is steadfast, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my heart is steadfast.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I would sing, I would make music;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}awake, my soul.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Awake, harp and lyre;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would wake the dawn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}I would praise you among the peoples, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and make music among the nations to you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}for great to heaven is your love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your faithfulness to the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Be exalted, God, o\uc1\u8217*er the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your glory o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 58 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Vengeance on Unjust Judges

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Al tashheth. Of David. A michtam.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 58}Do you speak what is right, you gods?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}With equity judge you your people?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In the land you practise iniquity \uc1\u8211* all of you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
violence do you dispense with your hands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The wicked go astray from the womb
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
liars take the wrong path from their birth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Venom have they like the venom of snakes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are like the deaf adder that stops her ears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}and refuses to listen to the voice of the charmer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or binder of spells, no matter how cunning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}O God, break to pieces the teeth in their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tear out the great teeth of the young lions, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}May they melt away like running water!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Like tender grass, cut down may they be!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Like the snail that dissolves on its crawling path,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the birth untimely which sees not the sunlight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Faster than a thorn-fire heats your pots,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will come with his tempest and sweep them away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The sight of such vengeance will gladden the righteous;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their feet they will wash in the blood of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}People will say, \uc1\u8220*Yes, the just are rewarded:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yes, on the earth is a God who is Judge.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 59 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Safety

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Al tashheth. Of David. A michtam, when Saul sent men to watch his house in order to kill him.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 59}Save me, O God, from my enemies;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}secure me from my assailants.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Save me from those who do wrong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
save me from the bloodthirsty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For see! They lay ambush for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
strong men are banded against me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
not for sin or transgression of mine,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for no guilt of mine, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}they run and make ready. Awake!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Come forth to meet me, and see!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}You, O {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God of Israel, awake!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
And punish the proud, every one;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
spare none of the traitors vile. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}At evening they come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
and, howling like dogs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
make their round in the city.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Look at their venomous mouths,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tongues like swords,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they think no one
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hears them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But you, {\scaps Lord}, laugh at them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you mock all the insolent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}My strength, I will sing to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for God is my sure retreat.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}My God with his love will meet me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and feast my eyes on my foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Slay them not, lest my people forget,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let your hosts keep them roaming and wandering.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}In their sinful speech snare them, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and may they be trapped in their pride,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the curses and lies that they utter.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}In your wrath make a clean end of them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that people, to the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may know that God rules in Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}At evening they come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
and, howling like dogs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
make their round in the city.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}They roam about for a feast,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and snarl, if they get not their fill.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}But I will sing of your might;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will ring out your love in the morning.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For to me you have been a sure refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a retreat in the day of my trouble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}My strength, I will sing praise to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for God is my sure retreat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my faithful God. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 60 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer after Defeat in Battle

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On shushan eduth. A michtam of David (for teaching), when he fought with Aram-naharaim and Aram-zobah, and Joab returned and defeated twelve thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 60}O God, you have spurned and broken us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}routing us in your wrath \uc1\u8211* restore us!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}You have shaken the land and cleft it;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
heal its tottering breaches.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}You have made your people drink hardship,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and given us wine of reeling.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}You have given those who fear you a banner,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a rallying-place from the bow, {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}for the rescue of your beloved.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Save by your right hand and answer us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}God did solemnly swear:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*As victor will I divide Shechem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and mete out the valley of Succoth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Mine is Gilead, mine is Manasseh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Ephraim is the defence of my head,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Judah my sceptre of rule,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Moab the pot that I wash in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Edom \uc1\u8211* I cast my shoe over it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I shout o\uc1\u8217*er Philistia in triumph.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}O to be brought to the fortified city!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O to be led into Edom!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Have you not spurned us, O God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You do not march forth with our armies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Grant us help from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for human help is worthless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}With God we shall yet do bravely:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he himself will tread down our foes. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 61 \uc1\u8211* Our God is a Strong Tower

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On stringed instruments. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 61}Hear my cry, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}be attentive to my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}From the ends of the earth I call
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto you, when my heart is faint:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
lead me to the rock
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that is high above me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For you are a refuge to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a strong tower in face of the foe.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}O to be guest in your tent forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hiding beneath your sheltering wings! {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For you, O God, do hear my vows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and grant the desires of those who fear you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Add many days to the life of the king;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may his years endure throughout all generations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In the presence of God be he throned forever;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may kindness and faithfulness watch over him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}And I will sing praise to your name forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
paying my vows day after day. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 62 \uc1\u8211* Quietness and Confidence

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On jeduthun. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 62}I wait alone in silence for God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}From him comes my help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Yes, he is my rock, my help, my retreat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I shall not be shaken too sorely.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}How long will you, all of you, batter a man,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as one might a leaning wall?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}From his height
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are planning to topple him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
They take pleasure in falsehood; they bless with their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but inwardly they curse. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I wait alone in silence for God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for from him comes my hope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Yes, he is my rock, my help, my retreat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I shall not be shaken too sorely.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}On God rests my honor and safety,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in God is my strong rock, my refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Trust in him, all you people assembled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pour out your heart in his presence;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God is a refuge for us. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The lowly are nought but a breath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the lofty are but an illusion:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in the balances up they go,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are lighter than breath altogether.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Trust not in gain of extortion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
set no vain hopes in robbery.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
As for wealth, if it bears fruit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
set not your heart upon it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}One thing God has uttered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
two things there are which I heard
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that power belongs to God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}and to you, too, O {\scaps Lord}, belongs kindness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for you requite each person
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
according to what they have done. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 63 \uc1\u8211* Athirst for God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 63}O God, my God, you, you do I seek:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}my heart thirsts for you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
my body faints for you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in a parched and waterless land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}As I in the temple have seen you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beholding your power and your glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}for better than life is your kindness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my lips shall utter your praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}So, while I live, I will bless you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lift up my hands in your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}As with marrow and fat am I feasted;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with joyful lips I will praise you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I call you to mind on my bed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and muse on you in the night watches;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}for you have been my help,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I joyfully sing in the shadow of your wings.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I cling close after you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your right hand holds me up.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}But those who seek after my life
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall go down to the depths of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}given o\uc1\u8217*er to the power of the sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or as prey for jackals to devour.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}But the king shall rejoice in God:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all who own his allegiance will glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
For the mouth of the false shall be stopped. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 64 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Malicious Foes

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 64}Hear, O my God, the voice of my lament:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}guard my life from the foe who affrights me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Hide me from villains who secretly plot,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the blustering throng of the workers of evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}who have sharpened their tongue like a sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and aimed bitter words like arrows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}which from ambush they launch at the blameless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shooting swiftly and unafraid.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They strengthen their wicked purpose,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they tell of the snares they have hidden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they say to themselves, \uc1\u8220*Who can see?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}They think out their crimes full cunningly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hidden deep in their crafty hearts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But God with his arrow will shoot them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
swiftly shall they be smitten.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For their tongue he will bring them to ruin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all will shudder with horror at the sight of them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Then every person, touched to awe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as they ponder what God has wrought,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will tell the tale of his deeds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}In the {\scaps Lord} shall the righteous rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in him shall they take refuge;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the true-hearted shall glory. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 65 \uc1\u8211* Hymn for a Thanksgiving Festival

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A psalm of David. A song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 65}It is seemly to praise you, O God, in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and to you shall the vow be performed in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}O you who hear prayer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto you shall all flesh come.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Our sins are too mighty for us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our transgressions you only can cover them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Happy the person who you choose
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to live beside you in your courts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
O may we be filled with the joys
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of your house, of your holy temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}In dread deeds you loyally answer us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O God of our salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whom all ends of the earth put their trust in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and islands far away.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}By your strength you establish the hills,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you are armed with might;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}you still the roaring of seas,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the turmoil of nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}so that those who live at earth\uc1\u8217*s bounds
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are awed at your signs:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the lands of the sunrise and sunset
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you make to ring with joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You visit and water the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you greatly enrich her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with the river of God, which is full of water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You prepare the corn thereof,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}watering her furrows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
settling her ridges;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you make her soft with showers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bless what grows thereon.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You crown the year with your goodness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your chariot-tracks drip with fatness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The desert pastures are lush,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hills greened with joy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The meadows are clothed with flocks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the valleys are covered with corn;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shout to each other and sing. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 66 \uc1\u8211* Thanksgiving for National Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. A song. A psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 66}Shout to God, all the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}sing praise to his glorious name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sing his glorious praise.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Say to God, \uc1\u8220*How dread are your works,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so great is your might that your enemies cringe to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}All the earth does homage to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
singing praises to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
singing praise to your name.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Come and see what God has done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
awe-inspiring is he in his works among people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}He turns the sea into dry land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and people cross the river on foot.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let us therefore rejoice in him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}the mighty Ruler eternal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose eyes keep watch on the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that no rebel lift up his head. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}O bless our God, you peoples;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sound aloud his praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}who keeps us in life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and keeps our feet from slipping.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For you, God, have tested us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have tried us, as silver is tried.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You did bring us into prison,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and put chains upon us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}you did let people ride over our head.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
We went through fire and through water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you led us out to a spacious place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}I will enter your house with burnt-offerings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will pay to you my vows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}which my open lips have uttered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
arid my mouth has declared in my straits.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}I will offer you offerings of fatlings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the odour of burning rams,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will sacrifice bullocks with goats. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Come and hear my story
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all who fear God \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of what he has done for me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}For my mouth had no sooner invoked him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than his praise was under my tongue.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Had I cherished sin in my heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} would never have listened.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}But assuredly God has listened,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and attended to my loud prayer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Blessed be God, who turned not aside
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my prayer, nor withdrew his kindness from me. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 67 \uc1\u8211* A Harvest Thanksgiving

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On stringed instruments. A psalm. A song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 67}Bless us, O God, with your favor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}let the light of your face fall upon us; {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}that the world may know your way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all nations your power to save.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Let the peoples praise you, O God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the peoples all of them praise you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Let the nations ring out their joy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you govern the peoples with equity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and guide the nations on earth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Let the peoples praise you, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the peoples, all of them, praise you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The earth has yielded her increase
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by the blessing of God, our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}May this blessing of ours win people to him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to all the ends of the earth. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 68 \uc1\u8211* Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David. A psalm. A song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 68}God arises, his enemies scatter:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}they who hate him flee before him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}As smoke before wind is driven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as wax melts before fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so before God vanish the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}But the righteous rejoice in God\uc1\u8217*s presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they exult with exceeding joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Sing to God, make music to his name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his name is the {\scaps Lord}, praise him who rides on the clouds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
and exult in his presence.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Father of orphans, defender of widows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is God in his holy abode.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}God brings home the lonely,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he leads forth the prisoner to comfort,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so that none but the rebel lives cheerless.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}God, when you went in front of your people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your march through the desert, {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}earth shook, the heavens poured rain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the presence of God, Sinai\uc1\u8217*s God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
at the presence of God, Israel\uc1\u8217*s God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Rain in abundance, God, you did sprinkle,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
restoring the languishing land of your heritage.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}A dwelling therein your people found:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your goodness, O God, you did care for the poor.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} spoke the glad tidings of victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a great army of women proclaim it:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*Kings of armies they flee, they flee,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the housewife divides the spoil:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}dove\uc1\u8217*s wings covered with silver
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and pinions with shimmer of gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}set with stones, like snow upon Zalmon.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a mountain of peaks is the mountain of Bashan.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}You high-peaked mountains, why look you askance
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the mountain which God has desired for his home
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whereon the {\scaps Lord} will live forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The chariots of God are twice ten thousand:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} came from Sinai, his holy place.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}You did mount the height with trains of your captives,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gifts that you had received from the people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The rebels shall live with the {\scaps Lord} God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} who sustains us daily,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the God who is also our savior. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Our God is a God who is savior.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The ways of escape from death
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are known to the {\scaps Lord} God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Yes, God will shatter the head of his foes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the rough scalp of those who strut on in their sins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}The {\scaps Lord} said: \uc1\u8220*I will bring you home from Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
home from the depths of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}that your feet you may bathe in blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your dogs lick their share of the foe.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}In the temple appear God\uc1\u8217*s triumphal processions,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
processions in praise of my king and my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}with singers in front, and minstrels behind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and maidens with timbrels between them, singing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*You of the well-spring of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bless the {\scaps Lord} God in the dance.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}There, in front, is Benjamin the little,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the princes of Judah beside them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the princes of Zebulon, princes of Naphtali.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}God, show your strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your godlike might,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as you did in the past,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}from your temple that crowns Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Kings shall bring tribute to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}Rebuke the beast of the reed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the herd of bulls, with the calves of the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Trample down the lovers of lies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Scatter the nations whose joy is in war.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}May they come from Egypt with gifts of oil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Ethiopia haste with full hands to God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}Sing to God, O you kingdoms of earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make melody to the {\scaps Lord}. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}Praise him who rides on the ancient heavens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
See! He utters his voice, his mighty voice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}Ascribe strength to the God over Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose strength and majesty live in the skies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}Awe-inspiring is God in his holy place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is Israel\uc1\u8217*s God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who gives strength and might to his people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Blessed be God. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 69 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance and Vengeance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On shoshannim. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 69}Save me, O God; for the waters
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}are threatening my life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I am sunk in depths of mire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where ground there is none.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am come into deep deep waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the flood overwhelms me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I am weary of crying, my throat is parched,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my eyes are wasted with waiting for God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}More than the hairs of my head
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are those who wantonly hate me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
More than my bones in number
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are those who are falsely my foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
That which I never robbed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how am I then to restore?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}O God, you know my folly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my guilt is not hidden from you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Through me let not any be shamed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who wait for you, {\scaps Lord} God of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Through me let not those be confounded
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who seek you, O God of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}It\uc1\u8217*s in your cause that I have borne taunts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my face has been covered with shame;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I became to my kindred a foreigner,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to my mother\uc1\u8217*s sons a stranger.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}It was zeal for your house that consumed me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the insults they hurled at you fell upon me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}When I chastened myself with fasting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they took occasion to taunt me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}When I put on a garment of sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they made me the theme of a taunt-song.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Those who sit in the gate make sport of me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the music of drunken songs.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But I pray to you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for a time of favor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In your great love answer me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with your loyal help, save me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}from sinking down in the mire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Lift me out of the deep deep waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}that the rushing flood may not drown me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the deep may not swallow me up,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the pit close her mouth upon me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Answer me, {\scaps Lord}, in your gracious kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
turn to me in your great compassion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Hide not your face from your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I am in trouble; O answer me speedily.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Draw near to me, redeem me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of my enemies, ransom me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}You know how I am insulted;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your sight are all my foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Insult has broken my heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
past cure are my shame and confusion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For pity I looked \uc1\u8211* there was none!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And for comforters, but I found none.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Poison they gave me for food,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to slake my thirst they gave vinegar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}May their table, outspread, be a trap to them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their peace-offerings be a snare.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}May their eyes be darkened and blind,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make them shake without ceasing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Pour your indignation upon them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let your burning wrath overtake them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}May their camp be a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in their tents be there none to live.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}For those whom you struck, they persecute,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those whom you wounded, they pain yet more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Charge them with sin upon sin,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may they not be acquitted by you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}From the book of life be they blotted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may their names not be written with the righteous.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Lift me, O God, by your help
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
above my pain and misery.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}Then will I praise God in song
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and magnify him with thanksgiving,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}which shall please the {\scaps Lord} better than ox,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or than bullock with horns and hoofs.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}The oppressed shall rejoice at the sight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You who seek after God, let your heart revive.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}For the {\scaps Lord} listens to the poor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he does not despise his prisoners.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}Let the heavens and the earth sing his praises,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the seas, and all creatures that move in them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}For God will bring help to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and build up the cities of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his people shall live there in possession.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}His servants\uc1\u8217* children shall have it for heritage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and those who love him shall live therein. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 70 \uc1\u8211* A Cry for Help in Persecution

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David. For commemoration.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 70}Quickly, God, deliver me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}hasten to help me, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}May those who are seeking my life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be ashamed and confounded.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}May those who delight in my hurt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be defeated and brought to dishonor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But may all who seek after you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
rejoice and be glad in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
May all who love your salvation
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
say, \uc1\u8220*Glory to God,\uc1\u8221* evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I am weak and needy:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make haste, God, to me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You are my help and deliverer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\scaps Lord}, don\uc1\u8217*t delay. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 71 \uc1\u8211* Forsake me not, when I am Old

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 71}In you, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let me never be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In your faithfulness save me and rescue me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bend your ear to me and save me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Be to me a rock of defence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a fortified house, to save me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for my rock and my fortress are you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Save me, my God, from the hand of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the grasp of the unjust and cruel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For you, {\scaps Lord}, are my hope,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in whom from my youth I have trusted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}On you have I leaned from my birth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb it was you who did draw me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
In you is my hope evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I have been as a wonder to many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you are my refuge and strength.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}All the day long my mouth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is filled with your praise and your glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Cast me not off in the time of old age;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when my strength is spent, forsake me not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For my foes whisper against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they who watch me take counsel together;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*God has left him,\uc1\u8221* they say: \uc1\u8220*pursue
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and seize him, for he is helpless.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}O God, be not far from me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
haste, O my God, to my help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Put my foes to shame and dishonor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with insult and shame be they covered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}But I will never stop hoping,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and more and yet more will I praise you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}All the day long shall my mouth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tell your faithfulness and your salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
though I know not how they may be counted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}I will tell of the might of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your faithfulness praise, you alone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}You have taught me, O God, from my youth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and till now have I told of your wonders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Even in old age and grey hair,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O God, do not forsake me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Still would I tell of your might
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto all generations to come.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Your power and your justice, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
extend as far as the heavens:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for great are the things you have done.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who is like you, O God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}You have caused us to see troubles many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but you will revive us again.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From the depths of the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you will bring me up again.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}You will multiply my greatness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and comfort me again.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}So with harp I will praise you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your faithfulness, O my God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and make music to you on the lyre,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O you Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}My lips shall ring out their joy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my mouth shall sing praises to you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all of me, which you have redeemed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Yes, all the day long shall my tongue
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
utter your righteousness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for ashamed and confounded are they
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who were seeking my hurt. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 72 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for a Just and Glorious Reign

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of Solomon.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 72}Give the king, O God, your own spirit of justice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}your spirit of right to the son of the king,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}that with right he may judge your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your downtrodden ones with justice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}May the mountains bear weal for the people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the hills yield fruits of justice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The weak may he help to their rights,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may he save the sons of the needy
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and crush the oppressor in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}May he live as long as the sun,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while the moon shines \uc1\u8211* for ages and ages.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}May he be like the rain on the meadow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like showers that water the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In his days may justice flourish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and welfare abound, till the moon be no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}May he reign from ocean to ocean,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the river to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}May his foes bow down before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his enemies lick the dust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}May tribute be rendered by kings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the isles and of Tarshish;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
may gifts be brought by the kings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of Sheba and Seba.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}May all kings fall prostrate before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all nations yield him their service.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}For he saves the poor when he cries,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the helpless and the downtrodden.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}He pities the weak and the poor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he saves the lives of the poor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}He redeems them from wrong and from violence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for dear is their blood in his sight.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Long may he live;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and may gold of Sheba be given him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
prayer, too, be made for him ceaselessly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the day long may men bless him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}May the land have abundance of corn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the tops of the hills may it wave.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
May the fruit thereof flourish like Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may men spring from the city like grass of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}May his name be blessed forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may his fame endure as the sun.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
May all nations envy his blessedness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all tribes of the earth call him happy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} God, Israel\uc1\u8217*s God,}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i who alone does wonders;}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 19}And blest be forever his glorious name.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i Let all the earth be filled with his glory.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i Amen and Amen.}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Here end the prayers of David, son of Jesse. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Book Three

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 73 \uc1\u8211* Fellowship with God Here and Hereafter

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 73}Yes, God is good to the upright,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}the {\scaps Lord} to the pure in heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}But my feet were almost gone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my steps had nearly slipped,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}through envy of godless braggarts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I saw how well they fared.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For never a pang have they,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their body is sound and sleek.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They have no trouble like mortals,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no share in human pain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}So they wear their pride like a necklace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they put on the garment of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}their eyes stand out with fatness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their heart swells with riotous fancies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Their speech is mocking and evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
condescending and crooked their speech.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}They have set their mouth in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while their tongue struts about on the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Small wonder that people resort to them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and drink deep draughts of their lore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*How does God know?\uc1\u8221* they say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*And has the Most High any knowledge?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}See! These are the godless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with wealth and ease ever increasing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Yes, in vain have I kept my heart pure,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and washed my hands in innocence;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}for all the day long was I plagued
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not a morning but I was chastised.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}But to resolve to speak like they do
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
would be treachery to your children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}So I sought to understand it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but a wearisome task it seemed:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}till I entered the holy world of God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and saw clearly their destiny.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Yes, you set them on slippery places;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
down to destruction you hurl them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}One moment and then what a horror of ruin!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They are finished and ended in terrors.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Like a dream, when one wakes, shall they be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose phantoms the waker despises.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}So my bitterness of mind
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the pain that stabbed my heart
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}show how dull I was and stupid
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
just like a beast before you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}But I am always with you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have hold of my right hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}By a plan of yours you guide me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and will afterward take me to glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Whom have I in the heavens but you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And on earth there is none I desire beside you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Though flesh and heart waste away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet God is the rock of my heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet God is my portion forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}For see! Those who are far from you must perish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you destroy all who are false to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}But I am happy when close to God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} my God I have made my refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may recount all the things you have done. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 74 \uc1\u8211* Lament on the Devastation of the Temple

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A maskil of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 74}Why, O God, have you spurned us forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Why smokes your wrath against the sheep of your pasture?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Remember the community you purchased of old
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to become by redemption the tribe of your heritage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Zion, the mountain you made your home.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Rouse yourself, visit its ruins complete.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
In the temple the foe has made havoc of all things.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Like lions your enemies roared through your house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
replacing our symbols by signs of their own,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}hacking, like woodsmen who lift
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
axes on thickets of trees,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}smashing with hatchets and hammers
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all of its carved work together.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}They have set your temple on fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the very ground they have outraged
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the place where lives your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}They have said in their heart, \uc1\u8220*Let us utterly crush them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They have burned all the houses of God in the land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}No symbol of ours do we see any more:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no prophet is there any more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
none is with us who knows how long.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}How long, O God, is the foe to insult?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Shall the enemy spurn your name forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Why, O {\scaps Lord}, do you hold back your hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
why keep your right hand in the folds of your robe?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Yet God is our king from the ancient days,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the midst of the earth working deeds of salvation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}It was you who did cleave the sea by your might,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and shatter the heads of the ocean monsters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}It was you who did crush many-headed Leviathan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and give him as food to the beasts of the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}It was you who did cleave the fountains and torrents;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it was you who did dry the perennial streams.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Yours is the day; yours, too, is the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it was you who did establish the sun and the star.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}It was you who did fix all the borders of earth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
summer and winter it\uc1\u8217*s you who have made them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Yet, for all this, the foe has insulted you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a nation of fools has reviled your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Do not give your dove to the beasts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do not forget your afflicted forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Look to the sleek ones \uc1\u8211* how full they are:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the dark places of earth are the dwellings of violence.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}O let not the downtrodden turn back ashamed:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the poor and the needy sing praise to your name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Arise, God, and defend your cause:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
remember how fools all the day insult you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Do not forget the uproar of your enemies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the din of your foes that ascends evermore. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 75 \uc1\u8211* God the Judge

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader; al tashheth. A psalm of Asaph, a song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 75}We praise you, God, we praise you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}we would call on your name and declare your wonders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*At the time I choose,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will judge fairly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Though earth melt and all her inhabitants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is I who keep steady her pillars.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I say to the boasters, \uc1\u8220*Boast not\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the wicked, \uc1\u8220*Lift not up your horn:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}lift not your horn on high,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
speak not boldly against the Rock.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For not from east nor west,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not from desert nor mountains;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}but God himself is the judge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
humbling one and exalting another.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}In the hand of the {\scaps Lord} is a cup
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
foaming wine, richly spiced.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Out of this he pours a draught,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the wicked of earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
must drain it down to the dregs.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}But I will rejoice forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
singing praise to the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}I will hew all the horns of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the horns of the just shall be lifted. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 76 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. With instrumental music. A psalm of Asaph, a song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 76}God has made himself known in Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}his name is great in Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}His tent is in Salem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his dwelling in Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}There he broke the lightning arrows,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shield, sword, and weapons of war. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Terrible is your splendor
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the everlasting mountains.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Despoiled were the stout of heart;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the sleep into which they had fallen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
none of the warriors
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
could lift a hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}At your rebuke, God of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sank chariot and horse to sleep.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Awful are you: who can stand
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before you, when once you are angry?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The judgment you gave from heaven
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
frightened the earth into silence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}when God arose to judgment
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to save the oppressed of the earth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The fiercest will praise you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to you will the remnant hold festival.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Vow and pay to {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and let all who are round him bring presents.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}He lops off the courage of princes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with terror fills kings of the earth. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 77 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Preservation as in the Days of Old

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On Jeduthun. Of Asaph, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 77}Loudly will I lift my cry to God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}loudly to God, so he hears to me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In the day of my trouble I seek the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the night I lift my hands in prayer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
refusing all comfort.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When I think of God, I moan;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I muse, my spirit is faint. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}When you hold my eyes awake,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I am restless and speechless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I think of the days of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
call to mind distant years.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I commune with my heart in the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I muse with inquiring spirit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*Will the {\scaps Lord} cast us off forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will he be gracious no more?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Has his love vanished forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Is his faithfulness utterly gone?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Has God forgotten to be gracious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or in anger withheld his compassion?\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Then I said, \uc1\u8220*This it is that grieves me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the hand of the Most High has changed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}I will think of the deeds of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and remember your wonders of old.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I will muse on all you have wrought,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and meditate on your deeds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Then your way, O God, was majestic:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
what God was great as our God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}You were a God who did marvels,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did show your power to the world
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}by your arm you rescued your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the children of Jacob and Joseph. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The waters saw you, O God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The waters saw you and shivered;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to their depths they trembled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Clouds poured torrents of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thunder rolled in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your arrows sped to and fro.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Loud was the roll of your thunder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lightnings lit up the world.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Earth quaked and trembled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}In your way, {\scaps Lord}, through the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your path through the mighty waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your footsteps were all unseen.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}You did guide your folk like a flock
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by the hand of Moses and Aaron. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 78 \uc1\u8211* The Warnings of History

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A maskil of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 78}My people, give ear to my teaching:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}bend your ears to the words of my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}as I open my mouth in a poem
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the riddling story of the past.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}What we have heard and known,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and what our ancestors have told us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}we will not hide from their children.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
We will tell to the next generation
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the praises and might of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the wonders that he has done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}He set up a testimony in Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a law he appointed in Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
which he commanded our ancestors
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to make known to their children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}that the next generation should know it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the children yet to be born
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
should arise and tell their children;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}that in God they might put their confidence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and not forget God\uc1\u8217*s works;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but that they might keep his commandments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}and not be like their ancestors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a generation defiant and stubborn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
a generation with heart unsteady,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spirit unfaithful towards God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Ephraimites, armed bowmen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
turned back in the day of battle.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}They did not keep God\uc1\u8217*s covenant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they refused to walk in his law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}They forgot what he had done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the wonders he had shown them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}He did wonders before their ancestors
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the country of Zoan in Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Through the sea which he split he brought them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
making waters stand up like a heap;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}he led them by day with a cloud,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the night with a light of fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}From the rocks which he split in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he gave them to drink as of ocean\uc1\u8217*s abundance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}He brought streams out of the rock,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and made water run down like rivers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Yet they still went on sinning against him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they defied the Most High in the desert.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}They willfully challenged God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
demanding the food that they longed for.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8220*Is God able,\uc1\u8221* such was their challenge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*to spread in the desert a table?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}From the rock that he struck there gushed water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and torrents that overflowed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but can he also give bread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or provide his people with meat?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}When the {\scaps Lord} heard this, he was furious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fire was kindled on Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
anger flared up against Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For they put no trust in God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no confidence in his help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}So he summoned the clouds above;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and, opening the doors of heaven,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}he rained manna upon them for food,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and grain of heaven he gave them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Everyone ate the bread of angels;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he sent them food to the full.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}He launched the east wind in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and guided the south by his power.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}He rained meat upon them like dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
winged bird like the sand of the sea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}In the midst of their camp he dropped it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all around their tents.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}They ate and were more than filled;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he had brought them the thing they desired.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}But the thing they desired became loathsome:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while their food was still in their mouths,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}the wrath of God rose against them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He slew the stoutest among them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and laid low the young men of Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}Yet for all this they sinned yet more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and refused to believe in his wonders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}So he ended their days in a breath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their years in sudden dismay.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}When he slew them, then they sought after him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they turned and sought God with diligence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}They remembered that God was their rock,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the Most High God their redeemer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}But they flattered him with their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lied to him with their tongue.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}Their heart was not steady with him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they were faithless to his covenant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}But he is full of pity:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he pardons sin and destroys not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Often he turns his anger away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
without stirring his wrath at all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}So he remembered that they were but flesh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
breath that passes and does not return.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}But how often they rebelled in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and caused him grief in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}tempting God again and again,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
provoking the Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}They did not remember his strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the day he redeemed from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}how he set his signs in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the country of Zoan his wonders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 44}He turned their canals into blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their streams undrinkable.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 45}He sent forth flies, which devoured them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
frogs, too, which destroyed them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 46}Their crops he gave to the caterpillar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the fruits of their toil to the locust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 47}He slew their vines with hail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their sycamore trees with frost.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 48}He delivered their cattle to the hail,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their flocks to bolts of fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 49}He let loose his hot anger among them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fury and wrath and distress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a band of destroying angels.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 50}He cleared a path for his anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
did not spare them from death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but gave them over to pestilence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 51}He struck down all the first-born in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the first fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 52}He led forth his people like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he was guide to his flock in the desert.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 53}Securely he led them, and free from fear,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while their foes were drowned in the sea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 54}To his holy realm he brought them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the mountain his right hand had purchased.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 55}He drove out the nations before them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and allotted their land for possession,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their tents for Israel to live in.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 56}Yet they tempted and angered the Most High God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they did not observe his decrees.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 57}They drew back, false like their ancestors;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they failed like a treacherous bow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 58}Their shrines stirred him to anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their idols moved him to jealousy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 59}When God heard of this, he was furious,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he spurned Israel utterly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 60}He abandoned his home in Shiloh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tent he had pitched among people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 61}He gave his strength up to captivity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his glory to the hands of the foe.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 62}He gave his people to the sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he was furious with his own.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 63}Fire devoured their young men,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their maidens had no marriage-song.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 64}Their priests fell by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their widows could not weep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 65}Then the {\scaps Lord} awoke as from sleep,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a warrior flushed with wine;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 66}and he beat back his foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
putting them to perpetual scorn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 67}He disowned the tent of Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he rejected the tribe of Ephraim;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 68}but he chose the tribe of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Mount Zion, which he loves.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 69}And he built like the heights his sanctuary,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the earth which he founded forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 70}And he chose David his servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
taking him from the sheepfolds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 71}From the mother-ewes he brought him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be shepherd to Jacob his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to Israel his inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 72}With upright heart did he shepherd them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with skilful hands did he guide them. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 79 \uc1\u8211* A National Prayer for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 79}Heathen, O God, have come into your land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}defiling your holy temple,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and laying Jerusalem in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}They have given the bodies of your dead servants
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the birds of the air to devour,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the flesh of your faithful to the beasts of the field.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Round about Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have poured out their blood like water;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and there was no one to bury them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}On every side our neighbors
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
revile us and mock us and jeer at us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}How long will you be angry, O {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Will your jealousy burn like fire forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Pour out your wrath on the nations that don\uc1\u8217*t know you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For Jacob they devoured,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have desolated his home.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Do not remember against us our ancestors\uc1\u8217* sins;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O meet us soon with your pity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for utterly weak are we.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Help us, O God our savior,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the renown of your name:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for your reputation deliver us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cover over our sins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Why should the nations say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Where is their God?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Let revenge for the outpoured blood of your servants
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be shown on the heathen before our eyes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}May the groans of the prisoner come before you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
free the children of death by your mighty arm.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Pay our neighbors back sevenfold
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the scorn they have heaped upon you, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Then we, your people, the flock of your pasture,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will give thanks to you for evermore,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tell your praise to all generations. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 80 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Preservation of Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On shoshannim, eduth. Of Asaph, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 80}Listen, Shepherd of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}who leads Joseph like a flock of sheep;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from your throne on the cherubs shine forth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}before Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Stir up your mighty power,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
come to our help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}God, restore us:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
show us the light of your face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so we may be saved.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}O {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
how long is your anger to smoke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
despite the prayer of your people?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}You have fed them with bread of tears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have made them drink tears by the measure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The scorn of our neighbors you make us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the laughing-stock of our foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}God of hosts, restore us:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
show us the light of your face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so we may be saved.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}A vine out of Egypt you brought;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did drive out the nations, and plant her;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}in the ground you did clear she struck root,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and she filled all the land.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The shade of her covered the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her branches the cedars of God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}She sent forth her shoots to the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and her branches as far as the River.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Why have you torn down her fences, and left her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be plucked at by all who pass by,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}to be gnawed by the boar from the forest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and devoured by the beasts of the field?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}O God of hosts, return:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
look down from heaven and see
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and visit this vine, and restore her
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}the vine which your right hand has planted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}She is burned with fire and cut down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before your stern face they are perishing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Support the one you have chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the one you have raised for yourself;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}then from you we will never draw back.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Preserve us, and we will call on your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Lord}, God of hosts, restore us:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Show us the light of your face,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so we may be saved. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 81 \uc1\u8211* For the Feast of Tabernacles

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On the gittith. Of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 81}Sing aloud to God our strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}shout for joy to the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Raise a song, sound the timbrel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sweet lyre and harp.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}On the new moon blow the horn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the full moon, the day of our festival.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For this is a statute for Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a ruling of the God of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}a witness he set up in Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when he marched against Egypt\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where he heard an unknown voice say:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*I removed from your shoulder the burden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and freed your hands from the basket.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}At your call of distress I delivered you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the thundercloud I answered you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
At Meribah\uc1\u8217*s waters I tested you. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Listen, my people, to my warning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O Israel, if you would but listen!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}There must not be a strange god among you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you must bow to no foreign god.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}I am the {\scaps Lord} your God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who brought you up out of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Open your mouth, that I fill it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*But my people did not listen to my voice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Israel would have none of me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}So to their own hard hearts I left them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to follow their own devices.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}O that my people would listen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that Israel would walk in my ways.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Soon would I humble their enemies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turn my hand on their foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Those who hate the {\scaps Lord} would cringe before him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in everlasting terror.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}But you would I feed with the richest wheat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with honey from the rock to your heart\uc1\u8217*s desire.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 82 \uc1\u8211* God the Upholder of Justice

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 82}God has taken his stand
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}in the divine assembly:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the midst of the gods he holds judgment.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*How long will you crookedly judge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and favor the wicked? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Do right by the weak and the orphan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
acquit the innocent poor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Rescue the weak and the needy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
save them from the hand of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*They have neither knowledge nor insight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in darkness they walk to and fro,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while the earth\uc1\u8217*s foundations totter.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}It was I who appointed you gods,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
children of the Most High all of you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Yet like mortals you will surely die,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you will fall like any prince.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Arise, O God, judge the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all nations are yours by inheritance. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 83 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Destruction of the Enemies of Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song, a psalm of Asaph.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 83}Do not keep silent, O God:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}hold not your peace, be not still, God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For see! Your enemies roar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those who hate you lift up their heads,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}laying crafty plans for your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and plotting against those you treasure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Come, let us wipe them out as a nation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so Israel\uc1\u8217*s name will be mentioned no more.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For, conspiring with one accord,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have made a league against you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Tents of Edom, and Ishmaelites,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Moab, and the Hagrites.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Philistia, with the people of Tyre;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Syria, too, is confederate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have strengthened the children of Lot. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Deal with them as you dealt with Midian,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with Sisera, with Jabin, at the torrent of Kishon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}who at Endor were destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and became dung for the field.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}who said, \uc1\u8220*Let us take for ourselves
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the meadows of God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Whirl them, my God, like dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like stubble before the wind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}As the fire that kindles the forest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as flame that sets mountains ablaze,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}so with your tempest pursue them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
terrify them with your hurricane.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Make them blush with shame;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
until they seek your name, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Everlasting shame and confusion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
disgrace and destruction be theirs.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Teach those who you alone
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are most high over all the earth. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 84 \uc1\u8211* The Song of the Pilgrims

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. On the gittith. Of the Korahites, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 84}How dearly loved is the place where you live,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} of hosts!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}How I long and yearn
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the courts of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Now heart and flesh cry for joy
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the living God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Even the sparrow has found her a home
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the swallow a nest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to lay her young,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
near your altar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my king and my God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Happy those who live in your house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praising you evermore. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Happy those whose strength is in you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
people with pilgrim hearts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}As they pass through the valley of tears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they make it a place of fountains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
clothed with the blessings of early rain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}From rampart to rampart on they march,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till at last God reveals himself in Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Lord}, God of hosts, hear my prayer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give ear, O God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Behold, O God, our defender,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and look upon your anointed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}for better a single day in your courts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than a thousand in my own chambers:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
better stand at the door of the house of my God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than live in the tents of ungodliness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}for the {\scaps Lord} is sun and shield,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} gives grace and glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He withholds no good thing from the life that is blameless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
happy those whose trust is in you. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 85 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for National Restoration

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of the Korahites, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 85}Once, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, you did favor your land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
granting change of fortune to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}forgiving the guilt of your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pardoning all their sin, {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}withdrawing all your fury,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
turning from your hot anger.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Restore us, O God our savior,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
put away your displeasure against us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Will you cherish your anger against us forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
prolonging your wrath to all generations?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Will you not revive us again,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that your people may be glad in you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Show us your kindness, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
grant us your salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Let me hear what God the {\scaps Lord} will speak;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for he will speak of peace
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to his people, to those who love him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turn their hearts to him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Soon those who fear him shall see how he saves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and glory shall live in our land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Kindness and loyalty meet;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
peace and righteousness kiss.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Loyalty springs from the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
righteousness looks from the sky.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord} shall give all that is good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our land yielding its increase,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}righteousness marching before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and peace on the path he treads. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 86 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Divine Guidance and Favor

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A prayer of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 86}Incline your ear, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, and answer me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I am afflicted and needy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Guard me, for I am loyal:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
save your servant, who trusts in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, be gracious to me, for you are my God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I cry to you all the day.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Gladden the heart of your servant;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for to you, {\scaps Lord}, I set my hope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For you, {\scaps Lord}, are good and forgiving,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
rich in love towards all who call on you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Listen, O {\scaps Lord}, to my prayer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
attend to my plea for mercy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In the day of my trouble I call on you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with assurance that you will answer me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}None of the gods is like you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor are any works like yours.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}All the nations you have made
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will come and bow down before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
giving glory, O {\scaps Lord}, to your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For great are you, and a doer of wonders;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you alone are God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Teach me, O {\scaps Lord}, your way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may walk in your truth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so my heart shall rejoice in your name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I will give you thanks, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with all my heart, my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will honor your name forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}For great is your love towards me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the depths of Sheol you have saved me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Haughty men have risen up against me, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a band of the violent seeking my life,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who think nothing of you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}But you are a God of pity and grace,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
patient and rich in kindness and faithfulness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
turn to me with your grace, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Grant your strength to your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and save the child of your handmaid.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Show me a sign of your favor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which those who hate me may see with confusion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
since you, {\scaps Lord}, are my helper and comforter. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 87 \uc1\u8211* Zion, City of God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of the Korahites, a psalm. A song.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 87}On the holy mountain stands
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}the city he founded.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} loves the gates of Zion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Glorious things he is speaking of you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you city of God. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*Among those who are mine I name Rahab and Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Philistia, Tyre, Ethiopia,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their people will say I was born in Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}As for Zion it will be said
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
each and all were born in her.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} will preserve her.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} will count, when enrolling the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*This one was born there, and that one was born there.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Singers and dancers alike will say
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*All my springs are in you.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 88 \uc1\u8211* The Prayer of Despair

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 88}O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I cry for help in the day-time,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the night my cry is before you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}let my prayer come into your presence,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
incline your ear to my cry.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For I am sated with sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my life draws near to Sheol.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I am counted with those who go down to the pit;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 without strength am I.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}My home is among the dead,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the slain that lie in the grave,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whom you remember no more
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cut off as they are from your hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}In the deepest pit you have put me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in shadows deep and dark.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Your wrath lies heavy upon me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
waves of your anger roll over me. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}You have put my friends far from me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have made them shun me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I am shut in, and cannot escape,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}my eyes are wasted with sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I call on you, {\scaps Lord}, every day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
spreading my hands out to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For the dead can you work wonders?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Can the shades rise again to praise you? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Can your kindness be told in the grave,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your faithfulness in the tomb?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Can your wonders be known in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or your help in the land of forgetfulness?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}I cry for help to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the morning my prayer comes before you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Why, O {\scaps Lord}, do you spurn me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hide your face from me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}From my youth I am wretched and dying,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I am numbed by the terrors I bear.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The fires of your wrath have passed over me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your terrors destroy me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}surging around me forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hemming me in altogether.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Those who love me you put far from me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the dark is my only friend. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 89 \uc1\u8211* The Promise to David

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song. A psalm of the Korahites.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 89}I will sing evermore of the love of the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
proclaiming to all generations his faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For your love you did promise to build up forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your faithfulness firm as the heavens themselves.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*I have made with my chosen a covenant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sworn to David my servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}to establish his seed forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to build up his throne to all ages.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Then the holy assembly in heaven
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praised your marvelous faithfulness, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For who in the skies may compare with the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who is like the {\scaps Lord} among the gods?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}A God to be feared in the holy assembly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
awful and great above all who are round him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}O {\scaps Lord} God of hosts, who is mighty as you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Your strength and faithfulness, {\scaps Lord}, surround you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You are the {\scaps Lord} of the raging sea:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when its waves surge, it is you who still them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}It was you who did pierce and crush Rahab in pieces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and scatter your foes by your mighty arm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Yours are the heavens, yours also the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world and its fulness, it\uc1\u8217*s you who did found them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The north and the south, it\uc1\u8217*s you have created them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Tabor and Hermon shout praise to your name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}You have an arm with the might of a hero;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
strong is your hand, high uplifted your right hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Justice and right are the base of your throne,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
kindness and faithfulness ever attend you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Happy the people who know the glad shout,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who walk, O {\scaps Lord}, in the light of your face.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}They exult in your name all the day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your righteousness they extol.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}For you are our strength and our pride.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Your favor will lift us to honor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}For the holy {\scaps Lord} of Israel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
keeps our defender and king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}In a vision of old you did speak
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in this way to the one whom you loved:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*A crown I have set on the hero
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I chose to be over the people
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*I found my servant David,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and anointed with holy oil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}My hand will be with him forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my arm will give him strength.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8220*No enemy will dare to assail him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the wicked to oppress him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}but his foes I will shatter before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will strike down those who hate him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*My loyal love shall attend him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will lift him to honor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}I will set his hand on the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his right hand on the rivers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*As for him, he will call me \uc1\u8216*My father,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God, and my rock of salvation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}And I will make him my first-born,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
highest of kings on the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*My love will I keep for him ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my covenant with him shall stand fast.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}His line will I make everlasting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his throne as the days of the heavens.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8220*If his children forsake my law,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and walk not as I have ordained;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}if they profane my statutes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and do not keep my commandments;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*I will punish their sin with the rod,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their iniquity with scourges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}But my love will I not take from him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor will I belie my faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8220*I will not profane my covenant
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by changing the word that has passed my lips.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}Once have I solemnly sworn
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I would not lie to David,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8220*that his line should endure forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his throne as the sun before me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}firm as the moon which for ever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ever is fixed in the sky.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}But you have cast off in contempt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and been furious with your anointed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}You have spurned the covenant with your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his sacred crown dashed to the ground.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}You have broken down all his walls,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and laid his bulwarks in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}All who pass on their way despoil him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the scorn of his neighbors is he now.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}You have given his foes the victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and made all his enemies glad.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}You have turned back his sword from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did not lift him up in the battle.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 44}The sceptre you took from his hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his throne you did hurl to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 45}You have shortened the days of his youth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and covered him with shame. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 46}How long, {\scaps Lord} will you hide you forever?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
How long are the fires of your wrath to burn?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 47}Remember, {\scaps Lord}, the shortness of life
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how fleeting you made all people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 48}Who can live without seeing death?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who can rescue their life from the clutch of Sheol? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 49}Where, {\scaps Lord}, is your kindness of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which you in your faithfulness swore to David?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 50}Remember, O {\scaps Lord}, how your servants are mocked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how I bear in my heart the scorn of all nations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 51}The scorn which your enemies hurl, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which they hurl at the footsteps of your anointed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 52}Blest be the {\scaps Lord}, for ever and ever.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i Amen and Amen.} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Book Four

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 90 \uc1\u8211* Hymn of Eternity

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A prayer of Moses, the man of God.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\cf1 90}Lord}{\super\cf2\fs24 1}, you have been a home to us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
one generation after another.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Before the mountains were born,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or the earth and the world were brought forth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
from everlasting to everlasting
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you are God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}You bring us back to the dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you summon mortals to return.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For you see a thousand years
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the passing of yesterday,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as a watch in the night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Your floods sweep them away;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
they are like a dream,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or like grass which sprouts in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}which blossoms and sprouts in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but by evening is cut and withered.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For your anger consumes us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the heat of your wrath confounds us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Our sins you have set before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our secrets in the light of your face.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For through your wrath our days are declining,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we bring our years to an end as a sigh.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The span of our life is seventy years,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or, if we are strong, maybe eighty;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
yet is their breadth but empty toil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for swiftly they go, and we fly away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Who lays to heart the power of your anger?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Or who stands in reverent awe of your wrath?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}O teach us to count our days
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so our minds may learn wisdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Return, O {\scaps Lord}; why so long?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Relent on your servants.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Grant us your love to the full in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that all our days we may shout for joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Make us glad for the days you have humbled us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the evil years we have seen.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Let your servants see you in action,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
show your majesty to their children.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Let the grace of the {\scaps Lord} our God be upon us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
uphold what our hands are striving to do. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 91 \uc1\u8211* In the Shelter of the Most High

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 91}You whose home is the shelter of God Most High,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}whose abode is the shadow of God Almighty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}can say to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8220*My refuge, my fortress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God, in whom I trust.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For he saves you from fowler\uc1\u8217*s snare,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from deadly plague,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}he shelters you with his pinions,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and under his wings you can hide.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His truth will be a shield and buckler.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}You need not fear the terror of night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the arrow that flies by day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}nor the plague that stalks in darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the pestilence raging at noon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}A thousand may fall at your side,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
ten thousand at your right hand:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but it will not draw near to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}You will only look on with your eyes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and see how the wicked are punished.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}You have made the {\scaps Lord} your refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you have made the Most High your defence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}You will never be met by misfortune,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no plague will come near your tent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}for he orders his angels to guard you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wherever you go.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}They will carry you with their hands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so you don\uc1\u8217*t hurt your foot on a stone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}You will trample down lions and snakes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tread on young lions and cobras.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*Because of their love for me, I will deliver them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will protect those who trust my name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}I will answer their cry and be with them in trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bringing them forth into safety and honor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}I will give them a life of many days,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will show them my salvation.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 92 \uc1\u8211* The Ways of God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm. A song; for the sabbath day.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 92}It is good to give thanks to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to sing praise to your name, O Most High,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}to declare your love in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your faithfulness in the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}with voice and a ten-stringed harp,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with music that throbs on the lyre.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For you make me glad by your deeds, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the work of your hands I will ring out my joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}How great are your works, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how deep are your thoughts!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The insensitive cannot know,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor can a fool understand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}that, though the wicked flourish like grass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and evil-doers all blossom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they will perish forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But you are exalted forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For see! Your enemies, {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
For see! Your enemies perish,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all evil-doers are scattered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}But you lift me to honor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and anoint me afresh with oil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}My eyes will feast on my foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my ears will hear of the doom of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The righteous will sprout like the palm,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 will grow like a cedar of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}In the house of the {\scaps Lord} are they planted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the courts of our God they will sprout.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}They will still bear fruit in old age,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all sappy and fresh will they be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}So they proclaim the {\scaps Lord} to be just,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my rock, in whom is no wrong. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 93 \uc1\u8211* The Lord, King of all the World

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 93}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} has taken his seat on the throne,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
clothed with majesty, armed with might.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Now the world stands firm, to be shaken no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}firm stands your throne from all eternity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
You are from everlasting.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The floods, O {\scaps Lord}, have lifted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the floods have lifted their voice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the floods lift up their roar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But more grand than the great roaring waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
more grand than the ocean waves,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
grand on the height stands the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}What you have ordained is most sure;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
most sure shall your house stand inviolate,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, for ever and ever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 94 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Vengeance on the Cruel

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\cf1 94}Lord}{\super\cf2\fs24 1}, God of vengeance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
God of vengeance, shine forth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Rise up, judge of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pay back the proud what they deserve.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, how long shall the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
how long shall the wicked exult,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}with their blustering arrogant words,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their braggart and wicked speech,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}crushing your people, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and afflicting your heritage,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}murdering widows and strangers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
slaying the fatherless?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}They think that the {\scaps Lord} does not see,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the God of Jacob regard it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Take heed, you dullest of people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when will you be wise, you fools?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Is he deaf, who shaped the ear?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Is he blind, who fashioned the eye?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Can he who trains nations not punish them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he who teaches knowledge to people?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} knows the thoughts of people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that only a breath are they.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Happy are those whom you chasten,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and teach out of your law,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}keeping them calm in the day of misfortune,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till a pit be dug for the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}For the {\scaps Lord} will not leave his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will not forsake his inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}For the righteous shall come to their rights,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all true-hearted people shall follow them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Who will rise up for me against those who do evil?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Who will stand up for me against workers of wrong?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Were it not for the help of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would soon have gone to the silent grave.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}When I thought that my foot was slipping,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your kindness, {\scaps Lord}, held me up.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}When with cares my heart was crowded,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your comforts make me glad.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Can corrupt justice be your ally,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
framing mischief by statute?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}They assail the life of the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and innocent blood condemn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}But the {\scaps Lord} is my sure retreat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my God is the rock of my refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}He will bring back their sin upon them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for their wickedness he will destroy them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} our God will destroy them. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 95 \uc1\u8211* For a Festival. A Hymn of Praise and a Solemn Warning

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 95}Come! Let us ring out our joy to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let us merrily shout to our rock of salvation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Before his face let us come with thanks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with songs of praise let us shout to him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For the {\scaps Lord} is a great God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
king above all gods.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}In his hand are the depths of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the heights of the mountains are his.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The sea is his, for he made it:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the dry land was formed by his hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Come! Let us worship and bow
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on our knees to the {\scaps Lord} our creator.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For he is our God; and we
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are the people he tends, the sheep in his care.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
If only you would heed his voice today:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Do not harden your hearts as at Meribah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or at Massah, that day in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}when your ancestors tempted and tried me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
though they had seen my deeds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*For forty years I was filled with loathing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for that generation, so I said:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*A people with wandering hearts are they,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ignorant of my ways.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}So I solemnly swore to them in my anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that never would they enter my place of rest.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 96 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Rule

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 96}Sing to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} a new song,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sing to the {\scaps Lord}, all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Sing to the {\scaps Lord}, bless his name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from day to day herald his victory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Tell his glory among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his wonders among all peoples.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For great is the {\scaps Lord} and worthy all praise;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
held in awe, above all gods:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}for all the gods of the nations are idols,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} created the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Before him are splendor and majesty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
beauty and strength in his holy place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord}, you tribes of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} glory and strength.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} the glory he manifests:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bring you an offering, enter his courts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Bow to the {\scaps Lord} in holy array:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tremble before him, all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Say to the nations, \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} is king.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The world stands firm to be shaken no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
He will judge the peoples with equity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Let the heavens be glad and the earth rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the sea and its fulness thunder.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Let the field, and all that is in it, exult;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the trees of the forest ring out their joy
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}before the {\scaps Lord}: for he comes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he comes to judge the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will judge the world with justice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the nations with faithfulness. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 97 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Judgment

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 97}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} is king, let the earth rejoice:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let her many isles be glad.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Clouds and darkness are round about him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
justice and right are the base of his throne.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Fire goes before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and blazes around his steps,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}his lightnings illumine the world:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the earth quakes at the sight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Mountains melt like wax
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
before the {\scaps Lord} of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The heavens proclaim his justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all nations behold his glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Shamed are all image-worshippers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who make a boast of their idols.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
All the gods bow before him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Zion is glad at the tidings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the towns of Judah rejoice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of your judgments, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For you are most high over all the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
greatly exalted above all gods.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} loves those who hate evil,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he guards the lives of the faithful:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the hand of the wicked he saves them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Light arises for the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and joy for the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Rejoice in the {\scaps Lord}, you righteous:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give thanks to his holy name. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 98 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Praise to the Lord

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 98}Sing a new song to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for he has done wonders;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
his right hand and holy arm
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
have won him the victory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} has made his victory known,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and revealed to the eyes of the nations his righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Mindful he was of his kindness to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
faithful he was to the house of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
All the ends of the earth have seen
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the victory of our God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Shout, all the earth, to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
break into cries and music.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Play on the lyre to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the lyre and with loud melody.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}With trumpet and sound of horn,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shout before the king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Let the sea and its fulness roar,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the world and the dwellers upon it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Let the streams clap their hands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let the hills shout for gladness together
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}before the {\scaps Lord} for he comes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he comes to judge the earth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will judge the world with justice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the nations with equity. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 99 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Just and Holy Rule

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 99}The {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} is king; let the nations tremble:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is throned upon cherubs; let earth quake.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} is great in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is high over all the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Let them praise your great and terrible name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Holy is he.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}You are a king who loves justice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
equity you have established:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
justice and right you have wrought for Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Exalt the {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bow down at his footstool.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Holy is he.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Among his priests were Moses and Aaron,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Samuel among those who called on his name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They called to the {\scaps Lord}, and he gave them answer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they kept his commands and the statute he gave them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Lord} our God, you gave them answer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
A God of forgiveness were you to them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who suffered their deeds to go unpunished.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Exalt the {\scaps Lord} our God;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bow down at his holy mountain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
For holy is the {\scaps Lord} our God. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 100 \uc1\u8211* A Call to Worship

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of praise.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 100}Shout, all the earth, to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Serve the {\scaps Lord} with gladness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
approach him with ringing cries.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Be sure that the {\scaps Lord} alone is God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
It is he who has made us, and his we are
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his people, the sheep of his pasture.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Enter his gates with thanksgiving,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his courts with praise.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Give thanks to him, bless his name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For the {\scaps Lord} is good, his love is forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to all ages endures his faithfulness. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 101 \uc1\u8211* A Model King

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 101}If kindness and justice I sing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}making melody to you, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I would look to the way that is blameless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and make it my own.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Within my own house I would walk
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with an innocent heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I would never direct my eyes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to a thing that is base.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The impulse to stray I abhor
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it shall not cling to me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Far from me be perverseness of heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or kinship with evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Who slanders their neighbor in secret,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I bring them to silence:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
haughty looks and proud hearts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will not abide.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I will favor the true in the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall live in my court.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Those who walk in a way that is blameless
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will be my attendant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}No one will live in my house
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who practises guile.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No one that speaks a lie
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will abide in my presence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Morn by morn I will wholly wipe out
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the bad in the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and cut off from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own city
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all workers of evil. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 102 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Pity and for the Restoration of Zion

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 102}Hear my prayer, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let my cry for help come to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Hide not your face from me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the day of my distress.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Incline your ear to me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I call, answer me speedily.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For my days pass away like smoke:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my bones are burned through as with fire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My heart is scorched, withered like grass;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I forget to eat my bread.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}By reason of my loud groaning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my flesh clings to my bones.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Like a desert-owl of the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like an owl among ruins am I.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I make my sleepless lament
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a bird on the house-top alone.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}All the day wild foes revile me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
using my name for a curse.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}For ashes have been my bread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tears have been mixed with my cup.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Because of your passionate anger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did raise me, then hurl me to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}My days come to an end, shadows lengthen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I wither like grass.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}But you, O {\scaps Lord}, are enthroned forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your fame endures to all generations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}You will arise and have pity on Zion;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it\uc1\u8217*s time to be gracious; her hour has come.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}For even her stones are dear to your servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even the dust of her ruins they look on with love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Then the nations will revere the name of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the kings of the earth his glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}when the {\scaps Lord} shall have built up Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and revealed himself in his glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}in response to the prayer of the destitute,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose prayer he will not despise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Let this be recorded for ages to come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that the {\scaps Lord} may be praised by a people yet unborn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}For he shall look down from his holy height,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the heavens the {\scaps Lord} will gaze on the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}to hear the groans of the prisoner,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to free those who are doomed to die;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}that people may recount the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s fame in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the praise of him in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}when the nations are gathered together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the kingdoms, to worship the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}He has broken my strength on the way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has shortened my days.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}I will say, \uc1\u8220*My God, take me not hence
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the midst of my days.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Your years endure age after age.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Of old you have founded the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the heavens are the work of your hands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}They shall perish; but you do stand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They shall all wax old like a garment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and change as a robe you will change them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}But you are the same, your years are endless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}The children of your servants abide,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
evermore shall their seed be before you.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 103 \uc1\u8211* Bless the Lord, O my Soul

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 103}O my soul, bless the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all that is in me, his holy name.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and forget not one of his benefits.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He pardons all your sins,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he heals all your diseases.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He ransoms your life from the pit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he crowns you with kindness and pity.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}He gives you your heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
renewing your youth like the eagle\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} executes justice \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and right for all who are wronged.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He revealed his ways to Moses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his acts to the children of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Full of pity and grace is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
patient, and rich in kindness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}he will not always chide,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor cherish his anger forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Not after our sins has he dealt with us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor requited us after our wickedness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}For high as the heavens o\uc1\u8217*er the earth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is his love over those who fear him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Far as is east from the west
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
has he put our transgressions from us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}As a father pities his children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so the {\scaps Lord} pities those who fear him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}for well he knows our frame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he remembers that we are dust.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}A person\uc1\u8217*s days are as grass;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
blossoms like a flower of the meadow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}At the breath of the wind it is gone,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the place thereof knows it no more.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}But the love of the {\scaps Lord} is eternal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his kindness to children\uc1\u8217*s children,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}to those who keep his covenant
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and mindfully do his behests.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}The {\scaps Lord} has set his throne in the heavens;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the whole world is under his sway.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, you angels of his,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mighty heroes performing his word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, all you his hosts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you servants who do his will.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, all you his works,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
far as his sway extends.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord}. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 104 \uc1\u8211* The Hymn of Creation

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 104}Bless the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, O my soul.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} my God, you are very great,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
clad in awful splendor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}covered with robe of light.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You stretch out the heavens like the cloth of a tent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He lays the beams of his chambers on water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He takes dark clouds for his chariot,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and rides on the wings of the wind.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He takes the winds for his messengers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the fire and the flame for his servants.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}He founded the earth upon pillars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to sustain it unshaken forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}With the garment of ocean he covered it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
waters towered over the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}But at your rebuke they fled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
scared by the roar of your thunder,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}mountains rose, valleys sank down
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the place appointed for them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}They dared not pass the bounds set for them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or cover the earth any more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}He sent brooks into the valleys,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they meander between the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The wild beasts all drink from them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the wild asses quench their thirst.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The birds have their home by the banks,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and sing in the branches.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}From his chambers above he gives drink to the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and satisfies earth with the vials of heaven.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}He makes grass grow for the cattle,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and herbs for people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He brings bread out of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}wine, to gladden hearts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
oil, to make faces shine;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bread, to strengthen hearts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The trees of the {\scaps Lord} drink their fill
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the cedars he planted on Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}where the little birds build their nest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the stork whose home is the cypress.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}The high hills are for the wild goats,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the rocks are for coneys to hide in.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}He created the moon to mark seasons,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and told the sun when to set.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}You make it dark: night comes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when all the wild beasts creep out.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Young lions that roar for their prey,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
seeking their meat from God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}At sunrise they slink away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lie down in their dens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Then people go forth to their work,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and toil till evening.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}How many, O {\scaps Lord}, are your works,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all of them made in wisdom!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The earth is filled with your creatures.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}And there is the great broad sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
where are countless things in motion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
living creatures, both great and small.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}There go the ships,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the Leviathan you made to play there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}They all look in hope to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to give them their food in due season.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}And you give with open hand;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they gather and eat to their heart\uc1\u8217*s desire.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}When you hide your face, they are terrified;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when you take their breath away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they die and go back to their dust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}But a breath from your lips creates them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and renews the face of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}May the glory of the {\scaps Lord} be forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may the {\scaps Lord} rejoice in his works.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}A glance of his makes the earth tremble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a touch of his makes the hills smoke.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}I will sing to the {\scaps Lord} while I live,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will play to my God while I am.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}May my musing be sweet to him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I rejoice in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}But may sinners be swept from the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the wicked vanish forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 105 \uc1\u8211* The Inspiration of the Past

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 105}Give thanks to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, call on his name:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make known his deeds among the nations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Sing to him, make music to him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
tell of all his wondrous works.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Make your boast in his holy name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be glad at heart, you who seek the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Seek after the {\scaps Lord} and his strength,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
seek his face evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Remember the wonders he did,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his portents, the judgments he uttered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}you who are offspring of Abraham, his servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the children of Jacob, his chosen ones.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He is the {\scaps Lord} our God:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in all the earth are his judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}He remembers forever his covenant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his promise for a thousand generations
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The covenant he made with Abraham,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the oath he swore to Isaac,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}and confirmed as a statute to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a pact everlasting to Israel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}to give them the land of Canaan
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the lot which they should inherit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}And when they were very few,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
few and but pilgrims therein,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}wandering from nation to nation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
journeying from people to people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}he allowed no one to oppress them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even punishing kings for their sakes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}He forbade them to touch his anointed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or do any hurt to his prophets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}When he called down famine on the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cut off the bread which sustained them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}he sent before them a man,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Joseph, who was sold as a slave.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}His feet were galled with fetters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he was laid in chains of iron,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}till the time that his word came to pass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the word of the {\scaps Lord} that had tried him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The king sent and freed him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the ruler of nations released him.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}He made him lord of his household,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ruler of all his possessions,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}to admonish his princes at will
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and instruct his elders in wisdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Thus Israel came into Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}His people he made very fruitful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and mightier than their foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}He inspired them to hate his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to deal with his servants craftily.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}He sent his servant Moses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and Aaron whom he had chosen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}portents he wrought in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and signs in the land of Ham.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Darkness he sent, and it fell:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet they gave no heed to his word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}He turned their waters into blood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
thus causing their fish to die.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}Their land was alive with frogs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
swarming even in the royal chambers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}At his command came flies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lice in all their borders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}He gave them hail for rain
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fire that flashed through the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}smiting their vines and figs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
breaking the trees of their border.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}At his command came locusts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
young locusts beyond all counting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}which ate every herb in the land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
ate up, too, the fruit of their ground.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}He struck down in their land all the first-born,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the firstlings of all their strength
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}Then forth he led Israel with silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and among his tribes no one was weary.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}Egypt was glad when they left,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for terror had fallen upon them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}He spread out a cloud to screen them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fire to give light in the night.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}He sent quails at their entreaty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and heavenly bread in abundance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}He opened the rock; waters gushed:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the desert they ran like a river.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}For he remembered his holy promise
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to Abraham his servant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}So he led out his people with joy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his elect with a ringing cry.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 44}And he gave them the lands of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the fruit of their toil for possession,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 45}that so they might keep his statutes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and be of his laws observant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 106 \uc1\u8211* The Nation\uc1\u8217*s Sin against the Lord

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 106}Hallelujah!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Who can describe his heroic deeds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or publish all his praise?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Happy they who act justly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and do righteousness evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Remember me, {\scaps Lord}, as you remember your people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and visit me with your gracious help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}May I see the good fortune of your elect,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may I share in the joy of your nation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in the pride of your heritage.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}We, like our fathers, have sinned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we have done perversely and wickedly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}In the land of Egypt our fathers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all heedless of your wonders,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and unmindful of your great kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the Red Sea defied the Most High.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But true to his name he saved them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in order to show his might.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they marched through the depths as through desert,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}saved from the hand of the hostile,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
redeemed from the hand of the foe.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The waters covered their enemies:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not one of them was left.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}So then they believed in his words,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and began to sing his praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}But soon they forgot his deeds:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they did not wait for his counsel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Their greed was ravenous in the desert;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they put God to the test in the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}He gave them the thing they had asked for,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but sent wasting disease among them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The camp grew jealous of Moses
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and of Aaron, holy one of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and covered Abiram\uc1\u8217*s company.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Fire broke out on their company,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
flame kindled upon the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}They made a calf in Horeb,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and bowed to the molten image.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}They exchanged their glorious God
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the image of ox that eats grass.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}They forgot the God who had saved them
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by mighty deeds in Egypt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Wonders in the land of Ham,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
terrors by the Red Sea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}So he vowed, and would have destroyed them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but for Moses his elect,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who stepped into the breach before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to divert his deadly wrath.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}They spurned the delightsome land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they refused to believe in his word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}They grumbled in their tents,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
would not listen to the voice of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}So he swore with uplifted hand
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to lay them low in the wilderness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}to disperse their seed among heathen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to scatter them over the world.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Then they joined them to Baal of Peor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and ate what was offered the dead.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}They provoked him to wrath by their deeds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and plague broke out among them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}Then Phinehas stood between,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and so the plague was stayed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}and it was counted to him for righteousness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
unto all generations forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}They angered him at the waters of Meribah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
through them it went ill with Moses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}They rebelled against his spirit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he uttered speech that was rash.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}They did not destroy the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as the {\scaps Lord} had commanded them;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}but they mingled with the heathen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and learned to do as they did.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}Their idol gods they worshipped,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and they were ensnared by them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}They sacrificed their sons
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and their daughters to the demons.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}They poured out innocent blood
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the blood of their sons and daughters
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom they offered to Canaan\uc1\u8217*s idols,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and the land was polluted with blood.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}They became unclean by their works,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and adulterous in their deeds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}Then the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s fury was on his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
filled with horror at his inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}He delivered them to the heathen,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to the sway of those who hated them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}Their enemies oppressed them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and subdued them under their hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}Many a time he saved them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
but they rebelled at his counsel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and were brought low by their wrongdoing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 44}Yet he looked upon their distress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when he heard their cry.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 45}He remembered his covenant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and, in his great kindness, relented.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 46}He caused them to be pitied
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by all who carried them captive.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 47}Save us, O {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and gather us out of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to give thanks to your holy name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to make our boast of your praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i {\super\cf2\fs24 48}Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, the God of Israel,}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i from everlasting to everlasting.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i And let all the people say \uc1\u8220*Amen.\uc1\u8221*}
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
{\i Praise the {\scaps Lord}.} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs48 Book Five

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 107 \uc1\u8211* The Song of the Redeemed

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 107}Give thanks to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} for his goodness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Let this be the song of the ransomed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whom the {\scaps Lord} has redeemed from distress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}gathering them from all lands,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
east, west, north, and south.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}In the wastes of the desert some wandered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
finding no way to a city inhabited.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Full of hunger and thirst,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their spirit failed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he saved them from their distresses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}guiding them straight on the way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till they reached an inhabited city.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Let them thank the {\scaps Lord} for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his wonderful deeds for people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}for the thirsty he satisfies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the hungry he fills with good things.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Some sat in darkness and gloom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
prisoners in irons and misery,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}for rebelling against God\uc1\u8217*s word,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and spurning the Most High\uc1\u8217*s counsel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Their heart was bowed with toil;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there was no one to help when they stumbled.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he saved them from their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}Out of darkness and gloom he brought them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and burst their chains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Let them praise the {\scaps Lord} for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his wonderful deeds for people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}For he shattered the gates of bronze,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and broke bars of iron.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Some were sick from their wicked ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and suffering because of their sins.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}All manner of food they hated;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they had come to the gates of death.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he saved them from their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}He sent his word and healed them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and delivered their life from the pit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Let them praise the {\scaps Lord} for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his wonderful deeds for people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Let them offer to him thankofferings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and with joy tell what things he has done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Some crossed the sea in ships,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
doing business in great waters.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}They have seen what the {\scaps Lord} can do,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his wonderful deeds on the deep.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}At his command rose a tempest,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which lifted the waves on high.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Up to heaven they went, down to the depths;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their courage failed them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}They staggered and reeled like drunkards;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all their skills useless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he saved them from their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}He stilled the storm to a whisper,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the waves of the sea were hushed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}They were glad, because it was quiet;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they were led to the haven they longed for.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}Let them praise the {\scaps Lord}, for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his wonderful deeds for people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}Where the people assemble, extol him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and praise him in council of elders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}He turns streams into a wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
springs of water into thirsty land,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}fruitful land into a salt waste,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of the sin of the people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}A desert he makes pools of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a land of drought into springs of water.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}He settles the hungry therein,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they establish a city to live in.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}They sow fields and plant vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which furnish a fruitful yield.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}By his blessing they multiply greatly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he lets not their cattle decrease.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}Yet when they are bowed and diminished
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by oppression, misfortune, or sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}he pours contempt upon princes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and on trackless wastes leads them astray
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}He lifts the poor out of misery,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and makes families fruitful as flocks.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}At this sight shall the upright be glad,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all wicked mouths shall be stopped.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}Let those who are wise observe this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and consider the love of the {\scaps Lord} 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 108 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song. A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 108}My heart is steadfast, O God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}my heart is steadfast.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I would sing, I would make music;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
awake, my soul.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Awake, harp and lyre;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would wake the dawn.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}I would praise you among the peoples, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make music among the nations to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For great to heaven is your love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your faithfulness to the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Be exalted, O God, o\uc1\u8217*er the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your glory o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}So those you love may be rescued,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
save by your right hand and answer us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}God did solemnly swear:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*As victor will I divide Shechem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
portion out the valley of Succoth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Mine is Gilead, mine is Manasseh,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Ephraim is my helmet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Judah my sceptre of rule,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Moab the pot that I wash in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on Edom I hurl my sandal,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I shout o\uc1\u8217*er Philistia in triumph.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}O to be brought to the fortified city!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O to be led into Edom!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Have you not spurned us, O God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You do not march forth with our armies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Grant us help from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for human help is worthless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}With God we shall yet do bravely,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he himself will tread down our foes. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 109 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Help

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 109}O God whom I praise, keep not silence;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}for their wicked mouths they have opened against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they speak to me with tongues that are false,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}they beset me with words of hatred,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fight without cause against me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My love they requite with hostility,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while for them I lift up my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Evil for good they reward me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and hatred for my love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*Set over him one who is godless,\uc1\u8221* they say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*an opponent at his right hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}From his trial let him come forth guilty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may his prayer be counted as sin.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Grant that his days may be few,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that his office be seized by another.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Grant that his children be fatherless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and that his wife be a widow.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Up and down may his children go begging,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
expelled from their desolate home.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}May all that he owns be seized by the creditor
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may strangers plunder the fruits of his toil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*May none extend to him kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or pity his fatherless children.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}His descendants be doomed to destruction!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Blotted out be his name in one generation!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}May his father\uc1\u8217*s guilt be remembered,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his mother\uc1\u8217*s sin not blotted out:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}on record always before the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his memory root from the earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}for he gave no thought to show kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but pursued the poor and the needy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
drove the downhearted to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*May the curses he loved light upon him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may the blessings he loathed be afar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Like a garment he clothed him with curses;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may they pierce to his inwards like water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and cling to his bones like oil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Let them be like the robe he wraps round him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like the belt he wears every day.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}Be this the reward of my adversaries,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of those who speak evil against me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}But you, {\scaps Lord} my {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be true to your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
deal kindly with me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your gracious kindness
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
save me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}For I am poor and needy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my heart is wounded within me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}I am gone like a lengthening shadow,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I am shaken off like a locust.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}My knees totter from fasting,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my flesh is shrivelled and spare.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}They heap insults upon me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when they see me, they shake their head.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Help me, O {\scaps Lord} my God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and save me in your kindness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Teach them that this is your hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your own doing, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}Let them curse, if only you bless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Put my assailants to shame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and make your servant glad.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}My opponents be clothed with dishonor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and wrapped in a robe of shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}I give thanks to you, {\scaps Lord}, with loud voice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I give praise in the midst of the throng;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}for he stands by the poor, at his right hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to save them from those who condemn them. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 110 \uc1\u8211* A Promise of Victory to the King

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 110}This said the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} concerning my lord,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Sit at my right hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till I set your foot on the neck of your foes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}On Zion the {\scaps Lord} is wielding
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your sceptre of might, and charges you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to rule over the foes that surround you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The day that you march to battle
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your people will follow you gladly
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
young warriors in holy array,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like dew-drops, born of the morning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} has sworn and will not repent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*As for you, you are priest for ever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as Melchizedek was.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}By your side will the {\scaps Lord} shatter kings
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the day of his wrath.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}He will execute judgment
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
filling the valleys with dead,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the broad fields with shattered heads.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He will drink of the brook by the way,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and march onward with uplifted head. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 111 \uc1\u8211* In Praise of the Divine Goodness

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 111}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}I will thank the {\scaps Lord} with all my heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the assembled congregation of his people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Great are the things that the {\scaps Lord} has done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
worthy of study by those who love them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Majestic and glorious is his work,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his righteousness abides forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For his marvelous deeds he has won renown;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} is gracious and full of compassion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Food he gives to those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
always he remembers his covenant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}His mighty works he has shown to his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in giving to them the nations for heritage.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}All that he does is faithful and right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all his behests are firm and sure.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}They are established for ever and ever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
executed with truth and uprightness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}To his people he sent redemption,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has appointed his covenant forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
His name is holy and awe-inspiring.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The fear of the {\scaps Lord} is the beginning of wisdom
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
those who keep it are wise indeed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
His praise abides for ever and ever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 112 \uc1\u8211* The Blessings of Godliness

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 112}Hallelujah.{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Happy are those who fear the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and greatly delight in his commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Mighty on earth shall be their seed;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a blessing shall rest on the race of the upright.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Wealth and riches are in their houses,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their prosperity stands forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}To the upright arises light in the darkness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
full of favor and pity and kindness are they.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}It is well with those who show pity and lend,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who support all their affairs upon justice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For they will never be shaken;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the just will be forever remembered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}They will not be afraid of evil tidings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with steady heart they trust the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Their heart is firm and unafraid:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they know they will feast their eyes on their enemies.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}With lavish hands they give to the poor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and their prosperity stands forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
They are lifted to heights of triumph and honor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The sight of them fills the wicked with anger:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
grinding their teeth with despair.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
The hopes of the wicked will come to nothing. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 113 \uc1\u8211* The Lord loves the Humble

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 113}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, you his servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The name of the {\scaps Lord} be blessed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}From sunrise to sunset
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the name of the {\scaps Lord} to be praised.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}High is the {\scaps Lord} above all nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
above the heavens is his glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Who is like the {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
seated on high?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}He bends down to look
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the heavens and earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}He raises the weak from the dust,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he lifts the poor from the dunghill,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}and sets them beside the princes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even the princes of his people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}He gives the childless woman a home,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and makes her the happy mother of children.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 114 \uc1\u8211* The Marvel of the Exodus

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 114}When Israel went out of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Jacob\uc1\u8217*s house from a barbarous people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}God chose Judah for himself,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Israel became his kingdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The sea saw it, and fled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Jordan river ran backwards.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Mountains skipped like rams,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hills like the young of the flock.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Why, sea, do you flee?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Jordan, why run backwards?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Mountains, why skip ram-like?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Why, hills, like the young of the flock?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Earth, tremble before the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the presence of Jacob\uc1\u8217*s God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}who turns rocks into pools of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and flint into fountains of water. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 115 \uc1\u8211* Israel\uc1\u8217*s Incomparable God

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 115}Not to us, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, not to us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but to your name give glory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for your kindness\uc1\u8217* and faithfulness\uc1\u8217* sake.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Why should the heathen say,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Where is now their God?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Our God he is in heaven;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whatever he wishes, he does.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Their idols are silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
made by human hands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They have mouths, but cannot speak;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have eyes, but cannot see.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}They have ears, but cannot hear;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have noses, but cannot smell.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}They have hands, but cannot feel;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have feet, but cannot walk:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
no sound comes from their throats.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Their makers become like them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so do all who trust in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}O Israel, trust in the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is their help and their shield.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}House of Aaron, trust in the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is their help and their shield.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}You who fear the {\scaps Lord}, trust in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he is their help and their shield.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord}, mindful of us, will bless us:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will bless the house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will bless the house of Aaron.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}He will bless those who fear the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the small and the great together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}May the {\scaps Lord} add to your numbers
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to you and to your children.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Blessed be you of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
creator of heaven and earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}The heavens are the heavens of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the earth has he given to people.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The dead cannot praise the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor those who go down into silence.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}But we will bless the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 116 \uc1\u8211* Song of Thanksgiving for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 116}I love the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, for he hears
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my voice, my pleas for mercy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For he has inclined his ear to me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will call upon him as long as I live.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}About me were snares of death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the anguish of Sheol was upon me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
distress and sorrow were mine.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Then I called on the name of the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I beseech you, O {\scaps Lord}, deliver me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Gracious and just is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
compassionate is our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} preserves the simple;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I was drooping, he saved me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Be at peace, my heart, once more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} has been good to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}You have rescued me from death,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my eyes from tears,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my feet from stumbling.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Before the {\scaps Lord} I will walk
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the land of the living.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}I held fast my faith, though I said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Ah me! I am sore afflicted,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}though in my alarm I said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Everyone is a liar.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}What shall I render the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all his bounty to me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}I will lift up the cup of salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and call on the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I will pay my vows to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the presence of all his people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Grave in the eyes of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the death of his loyal and loved ones.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Ah, {\scaps Lord}! I am your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your servant, child of your handmaid.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You have loosened my bonds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}I will offer to you a thank-offering,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and call on the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}I will pay my vows to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the presence of all his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}in the courts of the house of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the midst of you, O Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 117 \uc1\u8211* A Call to Praise

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 117}Praise the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, all you nations:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
laud him, all you peoples.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}For his mighty love is over us:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} is faithful forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 118 \uc1\u8211* Thanksgiving for Victory

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 118}Give thanks to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} for his goodness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Let the house of Israel now say:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Let the house of Aaron now say:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Let those who fear the {\scaps Lord} now say:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Out of straits I called on the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} answered and gave me room.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} is mine; I am fearless.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
What can mere people do to me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} is mine, as my help:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I shall feast my eyes on my foes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}It is better to hide in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than to trust in mortals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}It is better to hide in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than to put any trust in princes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Everywhere heathen swarmed round me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the name of the {\scaps Lord} I cut them down.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}They swarmed, swarmed around me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the name of the {\scaps Lord} I cut them down,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}they swarmed around me like bees,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they blazed like a fire of thorns:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the name of the {\scaps Lord} I cut them down.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Sore they pushed me, to make me fall;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the {\scaps Lord} gave me his help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} is my strength and my song,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he is become my salvation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Hark! In the tents of the righteous
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
glad cries of victory are ringing.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The hand of the {\scaps Lord} has wrought bravely,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}the hand of the {\scaps Lord} is exalted,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the hand of the {\scaps Lord} has wrought bravely.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}I shall not die: nay, I shall live,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to declare the works of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Though the {\scaps Lord} has chastened me sore,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has not given me over to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\i (The Procession arrives at the Temple)}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8220*Open to me the gates of victory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I would enter therein and give thanks to the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\i (The Welcome)}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8220*This is the gate of the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the righteous may enter therein;\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}I thank you because you have heard me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and are become my salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}The stone which the builders despised
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is become the head-stone of the corner.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}This has been wrought by the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is marvelous in our eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}This day is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own creation:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in it let us joy and be glad.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}O {\scaps Lord}, save us, we pray,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, prosper, we pray.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Blessed the one who enters
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
From the house of the {\scaps Lord} we bless you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}The {\scaps Lord} is God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he has given us light.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Wreathe the dance with boughs,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till they touch the horns of the altar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}You are my God, I will thank you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O my God, I will exalt you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his kindness endures forever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 119 \uc1\u8211* The Power and Comfort of the Word of God

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 119}Happy they whose life is blameless,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}who walk by the law of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Happy they who keep his charges,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and seek him with all their hearts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}who have done no wrong,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but walk in his ways.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}You yourself have appointed your precepts
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be kept with diligence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}O to be steadily guided
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the keeping of your statutes!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Then unashamed shall I be,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I look towards all your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I will thank you with heart unfeigned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when I learn your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}I will observe your statutes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O forsake me not utterly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}How can a young person keep their life pure?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
By giving heed to your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}With all my heart have I sought you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let me not stray from your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}In my heart have I treasured your word,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to keep from sinning against you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Blessed are you, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}With my lips have I rehearsed
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all the judgments of your mouth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I delight in the way of your charges,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
more than in riches of all sorts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}I will muse upon your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and look to your paths.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}In your statutes I delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will not forget your word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Grant that your servant may live,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will observe your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Open my eyes, that I see
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wondrous things out of your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}But a guest am I on the earth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
hide not your commandments from me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}My heart is crushed with longing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for your ordinances, at all times.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}You rebuke the proud, the accursed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who wander from your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Roll away from me scorn and contempt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I have observed your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Though princes sit plotting against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your servant will muse on your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}Your charges are my delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are my counsellors.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}I lie grovelling in the dust;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
revive me, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}I told of my ways, you made answer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 27}Grant me insight into your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will muse on your wonders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 28}I am overcome with sorrow;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
raise me up, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 29}Put the way of falsehood from me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and graciously grant me your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 30}I have chosen the way of fidelity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your ordinances I long for.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 31}I hold fast to your charges:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O put me not, {\scaps Lord}, to shame.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 32}I will run in the way of your commandments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you give me room of heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 33}Teach me, O {\scaps Lord}, the way of your statutes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will keep it to the end,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 34}instruct me to keep your law,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will observe it with all my heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 35}Guide me in the path of your commandments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for therein do I delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 36}Incline my heart to your charges,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and not to greed of gain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 37}Turn away my eyes from vain sights,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
revive me by your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 38}Confirm to your servant the promise
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which is given to those who fear you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 39}Remove the reproach which I dread,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because your judgments are good.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 40}Behold, I long for your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Quicken me in your righteousness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 41}Visit me, {\scaps Lord}, with your love
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and salvation, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 42}So shall I answer my slanderers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for my trust is in your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 43}Snatch not from my mouth the word of truth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for in your judgments I hope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 44}I will keep your law continually,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for ever and evermore.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 45}So shall I walk in wide spaces,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I give my mind to your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 46}I will speak of your charge before kings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and will not be ashamed thereof.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 47}Your commandments are my delight,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I love them exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 48}I will lift up my hands to your commandments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and muse upon your statutes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 49}Remember your word to your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on which you have made me to hope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 50}This is my comfort in trouble,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that your word gives life to me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 51}The arrogant utterly scorn me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I have not declined from your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 52}When I think of your judgments of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, I take to me comfort.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 53}I am seized with glowing anger
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
at the wicked who forsake your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 54}Your statutes have been to me songs
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the house of my pilgrimage.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 55}I remember your name in the night,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} and observe your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 56}My lot has been this,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I have kept your precepts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 57}My portion are you, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have promised to keep your words.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 58}I entreat you with all my heart;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
grant me your promised favor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 59}I have thought upon my ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and turned my feet to your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 60}I hasted and tarried not
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to give heed to your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 61}Though the godless have wound their cords round me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I have not forgotten your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 62}At midnight I rise to praise you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 63}With all those who fear you I company,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
aid with those who observe your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 64}The earth, {\scaps Lord}, is full of your kindness;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
teach me your Statutes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 65}Well have you dealt with your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as you have promised, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 66}Teach me discretion and knowledge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I have believed your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 67}Till trouble came I was a wanderer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but now I observe your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 68}You are good and do good;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 69}The proud have forged lies against me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I keep your precepts with all my heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 70}Their heart is gross like fat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I delight in your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 71}It was good for me to be humbled,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I should learn your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 72}The law of your mouth is better to me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than thousands of pieces of silver and gold.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 73}Your hands have made me and fashioned me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
make me wise to learn your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 74}Those who fear you shall see me with joy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for in your word have I hoped.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 75}I know, O {\scaps Lord}, that your judgments are right,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in faithfulness you have afflicted me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 76}Let your love be a comfort to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for so have you promised your servant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 77}Visit me with your quickening pity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for your law is my delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 78}Put the proud to shame, who have wronged me falsely:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will muse on your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 79}Let those turn to me who fear you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that they may learn your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 80}Let my heart be sound in your statutes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may not be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 81}My long for you to rescue me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I put my hope in your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 82}My eyes pine away for your promise:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
saying, \uc1\u8220*When will you comfort me?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 83}Though shrivelled like wine-skin in smoke,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your statutes I have not forgotten.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 84}How few are the days of your servant!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
When will you judge those who harass me?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 85}Proud people have dug for me pits
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
people who do not conform to your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 86}All your commandments are trusty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
With falsehood they harass me: help me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 87}They had nearly made an end of me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet I did not forget your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 88}Spare me in your kindness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will observe the charge of your mouth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 89}Forever, O {\scaps Lord}, is your word
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
fixed firmly in the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 90}Your truth endures age after age;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it is established on earth, and it stands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 91}By your appointment they stand this day,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all are your servants.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 92}Had not your law been my joy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in my misery then had I perished.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 93}I will never forget your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for through them you have put life in me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 94}I am yours, O save me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I give my mind to your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 95}The wicked lay wait to destroy me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I give heed to your charge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 96}I have seen a limit to all things:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but your commandment is spacious exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 97}O how I love your law!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
All the day long I muse on it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 98}Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for it is mine forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 99}I am prudent above all my teachers,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for your charges are my meditation.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 100}I have insight more than the aged,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because I observe your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 101}I refrain my foot from all wicked ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may keep your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 102}I turn not aside from your judgments,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you yourself are my teacher.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 103}How sweet are your words to my taste,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sweeter than honey to my mouth!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 104}Insight I win through your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
therefore every false way I hate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 105}Your word is a lamp to my feet,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a light to my path.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 106}I have sworn an oath, and will keep it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to observe your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 107}I am afflicted sorely:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
revive me, O {\scaps Lord}, as you said.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 108}Accept, {\scaps Lord}, my willing praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and teach me your judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 109}My life is in ceaseless peril;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I do not forget your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 110}The wicked set traps for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
yet I do not stray from your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 111}In your charges are my everlasting inheritance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are the joy of my heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 112}I am resolved to perform your statutes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
forever, to the utmost.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 113}I hate people of divided heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but your law do I love.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 114}You are my shelter and shield:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your word do I hope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 115}Begone, you wicked people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will keep the commands of my God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 116}Uphold me and spare me, as you have promised:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O disappoint me not.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 117}Hold me up, and I shall be saved:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your statutes shall be my unceasing delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 118}All who swerve from your statutes you spurn:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their cunning is in vain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 119}All the wicked of earth you count as dross,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
therefore I love your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 120}My flesh, for fear of you, shudders,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I stand in awe of your judgments.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 121}Justice and right have I practised,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do not leave me to my oppressors.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 122}Be your servant\uc1\u8217*s surety for good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let not the proud oppress me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 123}My eyes pine for your salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and for your righteous promise.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 124}Deal in your love with your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 125}Your servant am I; instruct me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may know your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 126}It is time for the {\scaps Lord} to act:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have violated your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 127}Therefore I love your commandments
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
above gold, above fine gold.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 128}So by all your precepts I guide me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and every false way I hate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 129}Your decrees are wonderful,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
gladly I keep them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 130}When your word is unfolded, light breaks;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
it imparts to the simple wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 131}With open mouth I pant
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with longing for your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 132}Turn to me with your favor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as is just to those who love you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 133}Steady my steps by your word,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so that sin have no power over me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 134}Set me free from those who oppress me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I shall observe your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 135}Shine with your face on your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 136}My eyes run down with rills of water,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because your law is not kept.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 137}Righteous are you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and right are your ordinances.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 138}The laws you has ordered are just,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trusty exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 139}My jealousy has undone me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that my foes have forgotten your words.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 140}Your word has been tested well;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your servant loves it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 141}I am little and held in contempt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but your precepts I have not forgotten.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 142}Just is your justice forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and trusty is your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 143}Stress and strain are upon me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but your commandments are my delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 144}Right are your charges forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
instruct me that I may live.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 145}With my whole heart I cry; O answer me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I would keep your statutes, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 146}I cry to you: O save me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will observe your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 147}Ere the dawn I cry for your help:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in your word do I hope.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 148}Awake I meet the night-watches,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to muse upon your sayings.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 149}Hear my voice in your kindness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, by your judgments revive me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 150}Near me are wicked tormentors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who are far from thoughts of your law;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 151}but near, too, are you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all your commandments are trusty.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 152}Long have I known from your charges
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you have founded them for all time.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 153}Look on my misery, and rescue me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I do not forget your law.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 154}Defend my cause and redeem me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
revive me, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 155}Salvation is far from the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for their mind is not in your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 156}Great is your pity, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Revive me, as you have ordained.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 157}My foes and tormentors are many,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but I have not declined from your charges.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 158}I behold the traitors with loathing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for they do not observe your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 159}Behold how I love your precepts:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
revive me, O {\scaps Lord}!, in your kindness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 160}The sum of your word is truth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all your laws are just and eternal.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 161}Princes have harassed me wantonly:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but my heart stands in awe of your word.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 162}Over your word I rejoice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as one who finds great spoil.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 163}Falsehood I hate and abhor,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but your law do I love.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 164}Seven times a day do I praise you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because of your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 165}Right well do they fare who love your law:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they go on their way without stumbling.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 166}I hope for your salvation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} I do your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 167}I observe your charges:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I love them greatly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 168}I observe your precepts and charges:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all my ways are before you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 169}Let my cry come before you, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give me insight, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 170}Let my prayer enter into your presence:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
deliver me, as you have said.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 171}My lips shall be fountains of praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 172}My tongue shall sing of your word,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all your commandments are right.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 173}Let your hand be ready to help me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for your precepts have been my choice.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 174}I long, {\scaps Lord}, for your salvation,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your law is my delight.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 175}Revive me that I may praise you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and let your precepts help me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 176}I have strayed like a wandering sheep
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
seek your servant, because
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I do not forget your commandments. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 120 \uc1\u8211* Prayer for Deliverance from Slander and Treachery

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 120}In distress I cried to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and he answered me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Deliver me, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the lip that is false
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the tongue that is crafty.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}What shall he give to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you tongue that is crafty?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
What yet shall he give to you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Arrows of warrior, sharpened,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with glowing broom coals together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I live by the tents of Kedar.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Already too long have I dwelt
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
among those who hate peace.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I am for peace:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but when I speak of it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they are for war. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 121 \uc1\u8211* The Lord Our Protector

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 A song of ascents

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 121}I will lift up my eyes to the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}O whence shall help for me come?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}From the {\scaps Lord} comes help to me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the creator of heaven and earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Your foot he will not let totter:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he who guards you will not sleep.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The guardian of Israel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will neither slumber nor sleep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} is he who guards you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your shelter upon your right hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The sun by day shall not strike you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the moon by night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}From all evil the {\scaps Lord} will guard you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will guard your life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} will guard your going and coming
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from now and for evermore. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 122 \uc1\u8211* The Joy and the Prayer of the Pilgrims

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 122}I was glad when they said to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}\uc1\u8220*We will go to the house of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Now we are standing,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
within your gates, O Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}O Jerusalem, built close-packed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a city without breach or gap,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}to you do the tribes come,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the tribes of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
as the law has ordained for Israel,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there to give thanks to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}There once stood thrones of justice
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
even thrones of the household of David.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Pray that all may be well with Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and well with those who love you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}well within your ramparts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and well within your palaces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For the sake of my brethren and friends,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will wish you now prosperity:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}for the sake of the house of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our God, I will seek your good. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 123 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Mercy

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 123}I Lift up my eyes to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}who are throned in the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}As the eyes of a servant
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
turn to the hand of his master,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
or the eyes of a maid
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the hand of her mistress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
so do our eyes turn
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
until he is gracious to us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Be gracious, be gracious to us, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Scorn enough, and more, have we borne
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}More than enough have we borne
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of derision from those at their ease,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of scorn from those who are haughty. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 124 \uc1\u8211* A Magnificent Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 124}\uc1\u8220*Had it not been the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} who was for us\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
let Israel say
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Had it not been the {\scaps Lord} who was for us
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when enemies rose against us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}then alive they\uc1\u8217*d have swallowed us up,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when their anger was kindled against us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Then the waters would\uc1\u8217*ve swept us away,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the torrent passed over us clean:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}then most sure would\uc1\u8217*ve passed over us clean
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the wild seething waters.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} who has given us not
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to be torn by their teeth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}We are like a bird just escaped
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the snare of the fowler.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The snare is broken,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and we are escaped.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Our help is the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the Creator of heaven and earth. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 125 \uc1\u8211* A Sure Defence

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 125}Those who trust in the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are like Mount Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
that cannot be moved,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but abides forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Round Jerusalem are the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the {\scaps Lord} is round his people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For he will not suffer
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the sceptre of wrong
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
to rest on the land
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
allotted to the righteous;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
else the righteous might put forth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their own hand to evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Do good, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the good,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and to the true-hearted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}But those who swerve
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
into crooked ways
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
will the {\scaps Lord} lead away
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the workers of evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Peace be upon Israel. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 126 \uc1\u8211* Sowing in Tears

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 126}When the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} turned the fortunes of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we were like dreamers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Then was our mouth filled with laughter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our tongue with glad shouts;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then among the nations they said,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} has dealt greatly with them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} had dealt greatly with us,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and we were rejoicing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Turn our fortunes, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as the streams in the Negreb.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}They who sow in tears
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
shall reap with glad shouts.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Forth they fare, with their burden of seed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and they weep as they go.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
But home, home, with glad shouts they shall come
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with their arms full of sheaves. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 127 \uc1\u8211* The Need of Heavenly Help

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents. Of Solomon.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 127}Unless the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} builds the house,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
those who build it labor in vain.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Unless the {\scaps Lord} guards the city,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the watchman wakes in vain.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}In vain you rise early,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and finish so late,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and so eat sorrow\uc1\u8217*s bread;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for he cares for his loved ones
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in their sleep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Children are a gift of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the fruit of the womb, a reward.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Like arrows wielded by warriors,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are the children of youth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Happy the man who has filled
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his quiver full of them.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He will not be ashamed when he speaks
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with enemies in the gate. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 128 \uc1\u8211* The Blessings of Home

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 128}Happy all who fear the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who walk in his ways.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}You will eat what your hands have toiled for,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and be happy and prosperous!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Like a fruitful vine shall your wife be
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the innermost room of your house:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
your children, like olive shoots,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
round about your table.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}See! This is the blessing
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
of the man who fears the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} shall bless you from Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
You will see Jerusalem nourish
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
all the days of your life.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}You will see your children\uc1\u8217*s children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Peace upon Israel. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 129 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Discomfiture of the Enemies of Zion

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 129}\uc1\u8220*Sore have they vexed me from youth\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}thus let Israel say
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Sore have they vexed me from youth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but they have not prevailed against me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*The ploughers ploughed on my back,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they made their furrows long.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But the {\scaps Lord}, who is righteous, has cut
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the cords of the wicked.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Let all who are haters of Zion
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be put to shame and defeated.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}May they be as the grass on the house-top,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
which withers before it shoots up;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}which fills not the arms of the reaper,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
nor the lap of the binder of sheaves
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}whereof no one says as they pass,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The blessing of God be upon you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
In the name of the {\scaps Lord} we bless you. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 130 \uc1\u8211* Out of the Depths

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 130}Out of the depths
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}I call to you, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Lord}, hear my voice:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give heed with your ears
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to my loud plea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}If you should mark sin, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, who could stand?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}But with you is forgiveness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you may be feared.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I wait for the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I wait for his word,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I look for the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
more than watchman for morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
than watchman for morning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Israel, hope in the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with the {\scaps Lord} there is love
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
with him plenteous redemption.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}And he redeems Israel
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from all his iniquities. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 131 \uc1\u8211* As a Little Child

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 131}O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, my heart is not haughty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my eyes are not lofty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I walk not among great things,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
things too wonderful for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Yes, I have soothed and stilled myself,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a young child on his mother\uc1\u8217*s lap;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like a young child am I.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}O Israel, hope in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from now and for evermore. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 132 \uc1\u8211* The Ancient Promise to David and Zion

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 132}Remember, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, David
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all his sufferings,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}the oath that he swore to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his vow to the Strong One of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}never to enter his tent,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
never to lie on his bed,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}never to give his eyes sleep
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or his eyelids slumber,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}till he had found a place for the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for the Strong One of Jacob to live in.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}We heard of it in Ephrathah,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the fields of Jaar we found it.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}We went to the place where he dwelt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
we bowed ourselves low at his footstool.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Arise, {\scaps Lord}, and enter your resting-place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you and your mighty ark.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Let your priests wear a garment of righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your faithful shout aloud for joy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For the sake of David your servant,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
do not reject your Anointed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} swore an oath to David
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
an oath that he will not break;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*I will set on your throne
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a prince of your line.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}If your sons keep my covenant
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the statutes I teach them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
then their sons, too, forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will sit on your throne.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}For the choice of the {\scaps Lord} is Zion;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
she is the home of his heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*This is forever my resting-place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
this is the home of my heart.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}I will royally bless her provision,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and give bread to her poor in abundance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Her priests I will clothe with salvation;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
her faithful will shout for joy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}There will I raise up for David
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
a dynasty of power.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I have set my anointed a lamp
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that shall never go out.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Robes of shame I will put on his foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but on his head a glittering crown.\uc1\u8221* 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 133 \uc1\u8211* Family together

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 133}Behold! How good and how pleasant
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}is the dwelling of kindred together!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Like precious oil on the head
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that ran down on the beard,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
the beard of Aaron, running
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
over the collar of his robe:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}like the dew upon Hermon which falls
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the mountains of Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
For there has the {\scaps Lord} ordained blessing \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
life that is endless. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 134 \uc1\u8211* An Evening Invocation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of ascents.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 134}Come, praise the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who stand by night
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the house of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Lift your hands to the holy place,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} who made heaven and earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bless you from Zion. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 135 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Power Revealed in Nature and History

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 135}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Praise the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Praise the {\scaps Lord}, you his servants,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}who stand in the house of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the courts of the house of our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, for the {\scaps Lord} is good:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Sing praise to his name it is pleasant.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} for himself chose Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Israel as his own special treasure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}For I know that the {\scaps Lord} is great,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that our {\scaps Lord} is above all gods.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}All that he wills he does
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the heavens and on the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the seas and in all the abysses.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Clouds he brings up from the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
lightnings he makes for the rain,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
wind he brings out of his storehouses.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The first-born of Egypt he struck,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
both humans and animals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Signs and wonders he sent
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
into your midst, O Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
upon Pharaoh and all his servants.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Many nations he struck,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mighty kings he slew
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Sihon, king of the Amorites,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Og, king of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all the kingdoms of Canaan.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}He gave their land for possession,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
possession to Israel his people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Your name, O {\scaps Lord}, is forever;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your memorial world without end.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}For the {\scaps Lord} secures right for his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and takes pity upon his servants.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The idols of heathen are silver
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
made by human hands.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}They have mouths, but cannot speak:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have eyes, but cannot see.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}They have ears, but cannot hear:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
there is no breath in their mouths.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Their makers become like them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so do all who trust in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}House of Israel, praise the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
house of Araon, praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}House of Levi, praise the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you who fear the {\scaps Lord}, praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} out of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who lives in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 136 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Love Revealed in Nature and History

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 136}Give thanks to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} for his goodness:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Give thanks to the God of gods:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Give thanks to the Lord of lords:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}To him who alone does great wonders:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Whose wisdom created the heavens:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Who spread forth the earth on the waters:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Who made great lights:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The sun to rule over the day:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Moon and stars to rule over the night:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Who struck the first-born of Egypt:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}And brought Israel out from their midst:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}With strong hand and outstretched arm:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Who cut the Red Sea in pieces:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}And brought Israel right through the midst:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}And shook Pharaoh with all his host into the sea
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Who led his people through the desert:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}Who struck down great kings:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}And slew noble kings:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Sihon, king of the Amorites:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}And Og, king of Bashan:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Who gave their land for possession:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}Possession to Israel his servant:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Who remembered our low estate:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}And rescued us from our foes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 25}Who gives to all flesh food:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 26}Give thanks to the God of heaven:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his kindness endures forever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 137 \uc1\u8211* By the Waters of Babylon

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 137}By the waters of Babylon there we sat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}and we wept at the thought of Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}There on the poplars we hung our harps.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For there our captors called for a song:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
our tormentors, rejoicing, saying:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Sing us one of the songs of Zion.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}How can we sing the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s song
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the foreigner\uc1\u8217*s land?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}If I forget you, Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may my right hand wither.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
if I am unmindful of you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or don\uc1\u8217*t set Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
above my chief joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Remember the Edomites, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the day of Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s fall,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when they said, \uc1\u8220*Lay her bare, lay her bare,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
right down to her very foundation.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Babylon, despoiler,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
happy are those who pay you back
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for all you have done to us.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Happy are they who seize and dash
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your children against the rocks. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 138 \uc1\u8211* The Constancy of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Care

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 138}I will thank you, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, with all my heart:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in the sight of the gods I will sing your praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}and prostrate before your holy temple,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
will praise your name for your constant love,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you have exulted your promise above all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When I called you, you answered;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you gave me strength, you inspired me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}All the kings of the earth shall praise you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
when they shall have heard the words you have uttered;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}and they shall sing of the ways of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and tell of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s transcendent glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}For, high though the {\scaps Lord} is, he looks on the lowly,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and strikes down the haughty from far away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Though my way be distressful, yet you preserve me:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you lay your hand on my angry foes,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your right hand gives me victory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} will accomplish all that which concerns me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Your kindness, O {\scaps Lord}, endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O do not abandon the work of your hands. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 139 \uc1\u8211* The Ever-Present God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i For the leader. Of David, a psalm.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 139}O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, you search and know me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}when I sit, when I rise you know it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
you perceive my thoughts from afar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When I walk, when I lie you sift it,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
familiar with all my ways.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}There is not a word on my tongue,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but see! {\scaps Lord}, you know it all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Behind and before you beset me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
upon me you lay your hand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}It\uc1\u8217*s too wonderful for me to know
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
too lofty I cannot attain it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Whither shall I go from your spirit?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Or whither shall I flee from your face?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}If I climb up to heaven, you are there:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
or make Sheol my bed, you are there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}If I lift up the wings of the morning
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fly to the end of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}there also your hand would grasp me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and your right hand take hold of me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}If I say, \uc1\u8220*Let the darkness cover me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and night be the light about me,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}The dark is not dark for you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but night is as light as the day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}For you did put me together;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb you did weave me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}I give you praise for my fashioning
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so full of awe, so wonderful.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Your works are wonderful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
You knew me right well;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}my bones were not hidden from you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
when I was made in secret,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and woven in the depths of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Your eyes saw all my days:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they stood on your book every one
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
written down, before they were fashioned,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while none of them yet was mine.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}But how far, O God, beyond measure
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
are your thoughts! How mighty their sum!
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}Should I count, they are more than the sand.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
When I wake, I am still with you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}Will you slay the wicked, O God?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
And remove from me the bloodthirsty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}who maliciously defy you
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and take your name in vain.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}Do I not hate those who hate you, {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Do I not loathe those who resist you?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 22}With perfect hatred I hate them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I count them my enemies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 23}Search me, O God, know my heart:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
test me, and know my thoughts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 24}and see if guile be in me;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lead me in the way everlasting. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 140 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Preservation

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 140}Rescue me, {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, from evil people;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the violent guard me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}from those who plot evil in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stir up war continually:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}who make their tongue as sharp as a serpent\uc1\u8217*s,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and under whose lips is the poison of adders. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Preserve me, O {\scaps Lord}, from the hands of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the violent guard me
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from those who are plotting to trip up my feet.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}The proud have hidden a trap for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
cords they have spread as a net for my feet:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
snares they have set at the side of my track. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I have said to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8220*My God are you;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give ear, {\scaps Lord}, to my loud plea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}O {\scaps Lord} my {\scaps Lord}, my savior mighty,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you did cover my head in the day of battle.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Grant not, O {\scaps Lord}, the desires of the wicked;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and what they have purposed, promote you not.\uc1\u8221* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Let them not lift up their heads against me.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
May the mischief they prate bring themselves to destruction,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}may he rain upon them coals of fire,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may he strike them down swiftly, to rise no more,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}no place in the land may there be for the slanderer:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
may the violent be hunted from sorrow to sorrow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}I know that the {\scaps Lord} will do right by the weak,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and will execute justice for those who are needy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Surely the righteous shall praise your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and they who are upright shall live in your presence. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 141 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Protection from Persecutors

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\cf1 141}Lord}{\super\cf2\fs24 1}, I call to you: hasten, to me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give ear to my voice, when I call to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Let my prayer be presented as incense before you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and my uplifted hands as the evening meal-offering.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Set, O {\scaps Lord}, a watch on my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
put a guard on the door of my lips.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Incline not my heart to an evil matter,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to busy myself in deeds of wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
in company with workers of evil:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
never may I partake of their dainties.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}A wound or reproof from a good person in kindness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is oil which my head shall never refuse.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
In their misfortune my prayer is still with them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Abandoned they are to the hands of their judges:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they shall learn that my words are true.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Like stones on a country road cleft and broken
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
so lie our bones scattered for Death to devour.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}But my eyes are turned towards you, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Do not pour out my life, for in you I take refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Keep me safe from the trap they have laid for me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from the snares of the workers of trouble.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Into their own nets let wicked people fall;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
while I pass by in safety. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 142 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Persecutors

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A maskil of David, while he was in the cave, a prayer.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 142}Loudly I cry to the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to the {\scaps Lord} plead loudly for mercy,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I pour my complaint before him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I tell my troubles to him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}When my spirit is faint within me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my path is known to you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In the way I am wont to walk in,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they have hidden a trap for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}I look to the right and the left;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but not a friend have I.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
No place of refuge is left me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
not a man to care for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}So I cry to you, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I say, \uc1\u8220*My refuge are you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all I have in the land of the living.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Attend to my piercing cry,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for very weak am I.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Save me from those who pursue me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for they are too strong for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Free me from prison,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that I may give thanks to your name,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
for the righteous are patiently waiting
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
till you show your bounty to me. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 143 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance and Guidance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A psalm of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 143}Listen, O {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}, to my prayer;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
give ear to my plea.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In your faithfulness give me answer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and in your righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}With your servant O enter you not into judgment,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for in your sight can no one alive be justified.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}For the enemy persecutes me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
crushing my life to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
making me live in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
as those who have long been dead.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}My spirit is faint within me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my heart is bewildered within me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}I remember the days of old,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and brood over all you have done,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
musing on all that your hands have wrought.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}I spread out my hands to you:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I thirst for you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
like parched earth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Answer me soon, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
because my spirit is spent.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Hide not your face from me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
else become I like those who go down to the pit.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Let me learn of your love in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for my trust is in you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Teach me the way I should go:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for my heart longs for you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Save me, O {\scaps Lord}, from my foes:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for to you I have fled for refuge.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}Teach me to do your will,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for you yourself are my God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Guide me by your good spirit,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, on a way that is smooth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Be true to your name {\scaps Lord}, spare me,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
bring me out of distress in your faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}In your kindness extinguish my enemies,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all those who vex me destroy;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for I am your servant. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 144 \uc1\u8211* The Warrior\uc1\u8217*s Song

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 144}Blest be the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} my rock,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who trains my hands for war,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my fingers for fighting.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}My rock and my fortress,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
my tower, my deliverer,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
my shield, behind whom I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who lays nations low at my feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, what are mortals
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you care for them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
humans,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
that you think of them?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}They are like a breath,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their days as a shadow that passes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Lord}, bow your heavens and come down:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
touch the hills, so that they smoke.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Flash forth lightning and scatter them,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your arrows send forth and confound them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Stretch out your hand from on high;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
pluck me out of the mighty waters,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
out of the hands of foreigners,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}who speak with the mouth of falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lift their right hand to swear lies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}O God, a new song I would sing you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on a ten-stringed harp make you music.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}For to kings you give the victory,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and David your servant you save.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}Snatch me from the cruel sword,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
rescue me from the hand of foreigners,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
who speak with the mouth of falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and lift their right hand to swear lies.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 The Prosperity of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s People

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}May our sons in their youth
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
be as plants well tended:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
our daughters like cornices
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
carved as in palaces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}May our barns be bursting
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with produce of all kinds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
In the fields may our sheep bear
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by thousands and ten thousands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}May our cattle be fat,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
our walls unbreached,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
may no cry of distress
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
ring in our streets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}Happy the people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who fares so well:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
and so fares the people
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
whose God is the {\scaps Lord}. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 145 \uc1\u8211* The Kingdom Everlasting

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i A song of praise. Of David.}
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 145}I will exalt you, my God, O king:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}I will praise your name for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I will bless you every day:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
I will praise your name for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Great is the {\scaps Lord} and worthy all praise,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his greatness is unsearchable.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}One age to another shall praise your deeds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
declaring the mighty things you have done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Of your glorious majesty they shall tell,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and I will muse of your many wonders.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Of the might of your terrible acts they shall speak,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the tale of your great deeds I will tell.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}The fame of your abundant goodness
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and righteousness they shall pour forth in song.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} is full of grace and pity,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
patient and rich in loving-kindness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} is good to all the world,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and his pity is over all things that he made.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}All your works give you thanks, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you are blessed of those who love you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}They shall speak of your glorious kingdom,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and of your might shall they discourse,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}making known to all his mighty acts,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and the glorious majesty of his kingdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Yours is a kingdom that lives through all ages:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
through all generations extends your dominion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} upholds all who fall;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he lifts up all who are bowed down.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}The eyes of all look in hope to you,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you give them their food in due season.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}You yourself open your hand,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and fill with your favor all things that live.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}The {\scaps Lord} is righteous in all his ways,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
gracious is he in all that he does.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}The {\scaps Lord} is near to all who call him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
to all who call upon him in truth.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}He will fulfil the desires of those who fear him;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he will hear their cry for help and save them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} is the keeper of all who love him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but all the wicked will he destroy.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 21}My mouth will utter the praise of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and all life will bless his holy name
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
for ever and ever. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 146 \uc1\u8211* The Great Protector

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 146}My soul, praise the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}I will praise the {\scaps Lord}, while I live;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
I will sing to my God, while I am.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Put not your trust in princes
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
mortals, in whom is no help.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}When their breath goes out,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they go back to the dust:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
on that very day
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
their purposes perish.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Happy those whose help
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
is the God of Jacob:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
whose hope is set
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
on the {\scaps Lord} their God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}the Creator of heaven and earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the sea, and all that is in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
He remains eternally loyal.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}For the wronged he executes justice;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
he gives bread to the hungry;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} releases the prisoners.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} gives sight to the blind:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} raises those who are bowed.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} loves the righteous.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} preserves the stranger,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
upholds the widow and orphan,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
but the wicked he leads to disaster.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} shall reign forever,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
your God, O Zion, to all generations.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 147 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Love and Power Revealed in Nature

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 147}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}It is good to sing praise to our God,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for praise is sweet and seemly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} builds up Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the outcasts of Israel he gathers.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}He heals the broken in heart,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and binds up their wounds.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}He counts the numberless stars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he gives names to them all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Great is our {\scaps Lord}, rich in power,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and measureless is his wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} lifts up the down-trodden,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the wicked he brings to the ground.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Sing songs of thanks to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and play on the lyre to our God.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}For he covers the sky with clouds,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
he prepares rain for the earth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
makes grass to grow on the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}He gives the cattle their food
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
the young ravens when they cry.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}His pleasure is not in the strength of the horse,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his joy is not in the speed of a runner;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}but the {\scaps Lord} has his pleasure in those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
in those who wait for his kindness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, then, O Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sing praise to your God, O Zion.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}For he strengthens the bars of your gates,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and blesses your children within you.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}He brings peace to your borders,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and choicest of wheat in abundance.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 15}He sends his command to the earth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his word runs very swiftly.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 16}Snow he gives like wool,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
frost he scatters like ashes.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 17}He casts forth his ice like morsels:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
who can stand before his cold?
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 18}He sends forth his word, and melts them:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his wind blows the waters flow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 19}He declares his word to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
his statutes and judgments to Israel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 20}No other nation did he do this for,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
they know nothing of his judgments.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 148 \uc1\u8211* The Universal Chorus of Praise

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 148}Praise the {\scaps {\super\cf2\fs24 1}Lord} from the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise him in the heights.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Praise him, all his angels;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise him, all his hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Praise him, sun and moon;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise him, all stars of light.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Praise him, you highest heavens,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and you waters above the heavens.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Let them praise the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for at his command they were made.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}And he fixed them for ever and ever
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
by a law which they dare not transgress.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}Praise the {\scaps Lord} from the earth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
you depths, with your monsters, all.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Fire, hail, snow and ice,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and stormy wind doing his word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}All you mountains and hills,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you fruit trees and cedars,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 10}all you wild beasts and tame,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
creeping things, birds on the wing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 11}All you kings and nations of earth;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
all you princes and judges of earth:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}young men and maidens together,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
old men and children together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 13}Let them praise the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
for his name alone is exalted.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Over heaven and earth is his glory.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 14}He has lifted his people to honor.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
Wherefore this chorus of praise from his saints,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
from Israel, the people who stand in his fellowship.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 149 \uc1\u8211* Song of Victory

\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
 {\cf1 149}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Sing to the {\scaps Lord} a new song,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sound his praise where the faithful are gathered.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Let Israel rejoice in its maker,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
sons of Zion exult in their king.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Let them praise his name in the dance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
making music with lyre and with timbrel.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}For the {\scaps Lord} delights in his people,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
adorning the humble with victory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Let the faithful exult and extol him
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
with glad ringing cries all night long.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}High praises of God in their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and a two-edged sword in their hand:
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 7}on the heathen to execute vengeance,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and chastisement sore on the nations,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 8}binding their kings with chains,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
and their nobles with fetters of iron,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 9}to execute on them the doom that is written.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
This is the glory of all his faithful.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah. 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Psalm 150 \uc1\u8211* Hallelujah

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\cf1 150}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\cf2\fs24 1}Praise God in his holy place.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Praise him in the sky, his stronghold.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 2}Praise him for his deeds of power.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
Praise him for his boundless greatness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Praise him with blast of horn;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise him with harp and lyre.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}Praise him with timbrel and dance;
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise him with strings and pipe.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 5}Praise him with resounding cymbals,
\par}

{\pard\fi-2080\li2800
praise him with clashing cymbals.
\par}

{\pard\fi-2440\li2800
 {\super\cf2\fs24 6}Let all that has breath praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\fi-1720\li2800
Hallelujah.
\par}

}