{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Verdana;}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 John (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 John\uc1\u8217*s Second Letter
 
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Greetings

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\cf1 1}From the elder, to the lady chosen by God and her children. I truly love you all, and I am not the only one but all who know the truth love you as well. {\super\cf2\fs24 2}We love you for the sake of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 3}Grace, mercy, and peace will be ours \uc1\u8211* the gift of God, the Father, and of Jesus Christ, the Father\uc1\u8217*s Son \uc1\u8211* in truth and love.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Live in truth and love

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 4}It was a great joy to me to find the lives of some of your children guided by the truth, in obedience to the command that we received from the Father. {\super\cf2\fs24 5}And now I implore you, dear lady, let us love one another This is not a new command I am writing to you. It is the command we have had from the beginning. \uc1\u8211* Let us love one another. {\super\cf2\fs24 6}And this is love \uc1\u8211* to live in obedience to the Father\uc1\u8217*s commands. This is the command as you learned from the beginning, to live a life of love. {\super\cf2\fs24 7}I say this because many deceivers have gone out into the world \uc1\u8211* men who do not acknowledge that Jesus Christ came in flesh and blood. Any such person is a deceiver and antichrist. {\super\cf2\fs24 8}Take care so that you do not what we have worked for but instead receive your full reward. {\super\cf2\fs24 9}Anyone who goes beyond and fails to live inside of the teaching of Christ does not have God. The person who lives inside that teaching \uc1\u8211* they have both the Father and the Son. {\super\cf2\fs24 10}If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive them into your house or even welcome them; {\super\cf2\fs24 11}because the person who welcomes them is sharing with them in his evil work.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs36 Final words

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi720 
 {\super\cf2\fs24 12}Though I have many other things to tell you, I would rather not use paper and ink. Instead I hope to come and see you, and to speak with you face to face, so that our joy may be complete. {\super\cf2\fs24 13}The children of your sister, who is chosen by God, send you their greetings.
\par}

}