{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Zephaniah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Zephaniah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message, which came to Zephaniah, son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hezekiah, in the time of Josiah of Judah who was son of Amon.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Day of Judgment on Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will utterly destroy everything
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
from off the face of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I will sweep away human and animal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the birds of the sky
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the fish of the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will cause the wicked to stumble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and I will cut off humanity from the face of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I will stretch out my hand over Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and I will cut off from this place the last remnant of Baal
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the name of the heathen priests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and those who worship on the housetops
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
to the stars in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and those worshippers of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
who also pay homage to Milcom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and those who turn back
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
from following the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And those who do not seek the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
nor strive to find him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Be silent before the Lord {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
for near is the day of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
for the {\scaps Lord} has prepared a sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he has sanctified his guests.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On the day of the {\scaps Lord\uc1\u8217*s} sacrifice:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will punish the officers and the royal princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and all those who clothe themselves in foreign apparel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On that day:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will punish all who leap over the threshold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
who fill the house of their lord with violence and deceit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Listen on that day, says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
A cry will be heard from the Fish Gate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and a wailing from the New Quarter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and a great din from the hills.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Those who live in the Mortar wail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
for all the traders are silenced,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the money counters wiped out.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will search Jerusalem with a lamp,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
I will punish those who are at ease,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
who sit comfortably with their wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
who say to themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*the {\scaps Lord} brings neither prosperity nor calamity.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Their wealth will become a prey
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and their houses a desolation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Though they build houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
they will not inhabit them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
though they plant vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
they will not drink wine from them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Near is the day of the {\scaps Lord}!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Near and rapidly approaching!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Near is the bitter day of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the scream of the warrior.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}That day is a day of wrath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
a day of trouble and distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a day of destruction and desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
a day of darkness and gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
a day of clouds and thick darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}a day of the trumpet and battle-cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
against the fortified cities
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and against the high battlements.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And I will bring distress upon the people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and they will walk as the blind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
because they have sinned against the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
and their blood will be poured out as dust
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and their flesh as dung.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them. For in the day of the wrath of the {\scaps Lord} and in the fire of his fury the whole earth will be consumed. For he will make a speedy end of all the inhabitants of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Imminent Judgment upon the Nations

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Be ashamed within yourselves, be ashamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}before you become as the drifting chaff,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
before the anger of the {\scaps Lord} comes upon you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
before the day of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s wrath comes upon you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Seek the {\scaps Lord} all you meek of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
you who obey his law;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Seek righteousness, seek meekness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
perhaps you may be hidden in the day of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s wrath.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For Gaza will be forsaken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Ashkelon a desolation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ashdod \uc1\u8211* by noon will they rout her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and Ekron be torn up!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Woe to those who live by the sea coast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
people of the Cherethites!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The word of the {\scaps Lord} is against you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Canaan, land of the Philistines!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
I will destroy you so that you will be without inhabitants,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and you will become shepherds\uc1\u8217* cots and folds for flocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The sea coast will belong to the survivors of the house of Judah.They will pasture their flocks there. In the house of Ashkelon they will lie down at evening. The {\scaps Lord} their God will be with them and restore their fortunes.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I have heard the taunts of Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and the revilings of the Ammonites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
how they have taunted my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and spoken boastfully concerning their border.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Therefore as I live, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, the God of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Moab will be like Sodom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
and the Ammonites like Gomorrah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
a pile of nettles and saltpits,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
and a desolation, forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
The residue of my people will plunder them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
and the survivors of my nation will inherit them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This will they have for their pride,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
because they have taunted and spoken boastfully
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
against the people of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} will terrify them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he will reduce all the gods of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
then all the peoples of the nations will worship him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
each in their own land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}You, also, Ethiopians,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
slain by his sword are you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And he will stretch out his hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
against the north and destroy Assyria;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
And he will make Nineveh a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
dry as the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Herds will lie down in it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
every beast of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Desert owl and screech owl
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
will lodge in its capitals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The owl will hoot in the window,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
the raven on the doorstep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
all stripped bare of cedar.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This is the exultant city which sat secure. The city who said to herself, I am and there is none else! How has she become a desolation! A lair of beasts! Every passerby hisses at her, shakes their hand.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s Deep-seated Corruption

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Woe to the rebellious and unclean city of oppression,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}She has not obeyed the voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
she has not accepted instruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In the {\scaps Lord} she has not trusted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
to her God she has not drawn near.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Her rulers in her midst are roaring lions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Her judges are evening wolves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
who leave nothing over until the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Her prophets are braggarts, faithless men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Her priests profane what is holy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and do violence to the law.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} is righteous in her midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he does no wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Morning by morning
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he establishes his decree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Light is not lacking,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
an oversight is unknown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But the unjust know no shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*I have cut off nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
their turrets are destroyed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I have laid waste their broad streets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
so that none passes over them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Desolate are their cities without people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
without inhabitants.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*Surely the city will fear me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
she will accept instruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Nothing will vanish from her eyes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
that I have impressed upon her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
But the more zealously have they made all their deeds corrupt.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Future Vindication and Exultation of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Wait for me, is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message, until the day when I stand up as a witness, for it is my fixed purpose to gather the nations, to collect the kingdoms, to pour upon them my wrath and my hot anger; for by the fire of my fury will all the earth be consumed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For then I will purify the lips of all peoples, so that they will all call on the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s name, to serve him with one accord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}From beyond the rivers of Cush my worshipers will bring me offerings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On that day you will no longer be ashamed of all your deeds by which you rebelled against me. For I will rid you of your proudly arrogant ones, and you will never again be haughty on my holy mountain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But I will leave in your midst a people humble and poor, and the remnant of Israel will trust in the name of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They will not do evil, nor speak falsehood, and a deceitful tongue will not be found in their mouth; but they will pasture and lie down, and no one will make them afraid.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Cry out with joy, daughter of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
shout aloud, Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Rejoice and exult with all your heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
daughter of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The {\scaps Lord} has put away your adversaries,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he has turned away your foes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
the {\scaps Lord} is king in your midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
you will fear evil no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In that day it will be said to Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Fear not!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
Zion, let not your hands grow weak!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The {\scaps Lord} your God is in your midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
a victorious hero.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
He will rejoice over you with joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
he will renew his love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
he will exult over you with singing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}as on a day of festival.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will take away from you your disgrace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and put away from you your reproach.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I will destroy at that time
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
all who afflict you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will deliver the lame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and gather the outcast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will make them an object of renown
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
and fame in all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I will do good to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
at the time when I gather you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For I will make you an object of fame and renown
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
among all the peoples of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
when I bring back your captivity before your eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
This says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

}