{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0 
{\fonttbl{
\f0\froman Georgia;
\f1\fswiss Verdana;
}}\fs24 
{\colortbl
;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\hyphauto\ftnbj

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Open English Bible

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 NT, Psalms

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Publication Data

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 This is release 2020.2 of the Open English Bible. This version uses Commonwealth spelling (for example, \uc1\u8216*colour\uc1\u8217*).
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Preface (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Preface

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Open English Bible

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 The Open English Bible project aims to create a modern English translation of the Bible which is completely free of copyright restrictions and available without cost for any purpose.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The OEB is your Bible \uc1\u8211* you can use it in worship, print as many copies as you want (in whole or part), republish it on your own website, even remix it or take it as the base for your own translation to meet your needs and the needs of your community. And you can do this without needing our permission or paying us a cent (or penny, rupee or kobo).
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Base texts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 The normative text for the OEB New Testament is the Westcott & Hort critical text. Since the NA28 is subject to a claim of copyright, W&H remains the best available public domain text.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The normative text for the OEB Old Testament is the Codex Leningradensis (Leningrad Codex); specifically the electronic version of the Westminster Leningrad Codex.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The OEB is being created by taking existing English language translations which are in the public domain, and conforming them to modern English and suitable public domain Greek and Hebrew source texts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The New Testament of the OEB is being formed on the base of the \uc1\u8216*Twentieth Century New Testament\uc1\u8217* (\uc1\u8217*TCNT\uc1\u8217*), in particular the revised edition published in 1904.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The TCNT was one of the earliest 20th century attempts at a translation in clear modern language aimed at the ordinary reader and based on a modern textual base (ie Westcott & Hort). Predating the mid 20th century translations such as the New English Bible and even Moffatt\uc1\u8221*s groundbreaking attempt, it is out of copyright worldwide. The TCNT also has a particular resonance with the open source and free content communities of today \uc1\u8211* it was created by a loose collaboration of volunteers rather than a top down hierarchy. Given the requirements of modern language and public domain status the TCNT was the best contender.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The Old Testament books which have been completed at this stage lean heavily on the work of John Edgar McFadyen and Charles Foster Kent, both of whom were very respected turn of the century Old Testament scholars.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Copyright

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 The OEB is available under a CC0 licence, effectively a waiver of copyright which allows the maximum reuse. We request (though this is not a licence condition) that altered versions be distributed under another name, or with changes clearly and comprehensively disclosed so that readers are not confused.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Ruth (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The book of

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Ruth

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Naomi and Ruth

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the time when the judges ruled, there was once a famine in the land. A man from Bethlehem in Judah took his wife and two sons to live in the territory of Moab.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}His name was Elimelech and his wife\uc1\u8217*s was Naomi, and his two sons were Mahlon and Chilion. They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah. After they had been living in Moab for some time,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Elimelech died, and Naomi was left with her two sons,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}who married Moabite women named Orpah and Ruth. After they had lived there about ten years,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Mahlon and Chilion both died, and Naomi was left alone, without husband or sons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So she set out with her daughters-in-law to return from the land of Moab, for she had heard that the {\scaps Lord} had remembered his people and given them food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As they were setting out together on the journey to Judah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Naomi said to her daughters-in-law, \uc1\u8216*Go, return both of you to the home of your mother. May the {\scaps Lord} be kind to you as you have been kind to the dead and to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} grant that each of you may find peace and happiness in the house of a new husband.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Then she kissed them; but they began to weep aloud{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and said to her, \uc1\u8216*No, we will return with you to your people.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Naomi said, \uc1\u8216*Go back, my daughters. Why should you go with me? Can I still bear sons who might become your husbands?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Go back, my daughters, go your own way, because I am too old to have a husband. Even if I should say, \uc1\u8220*I have hope,\uc1\u8221* even if I should have a husband tonight and should bear sons,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}would you wait for them until they were grown up? Would you remain single for them? No, my daughters! My heart grieves for you, for the {\scaps Lord} has sent me adversity.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then they again wept aloud, and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law goodbye, but Ruth stayed with her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Look,\uc1\u8217* said Naomi, \uc1\u8216*your sister-in-law is going back to her own people and to her own gods. Go along with her!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But Ruth answered, \uc1\u8216*Do not urge me to leave you or to go back. I will go where you go, and I will stay wherever you stay. Your people will be my people, and your God my God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will die where you die, and be buried there. May the {\scaps Lord} bring a curse upon me, if anything but death separate you and me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When Naomi saw that Ruth was determined to go with her, she ceased urging her to return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So they journeyed on until they came to Bethlehem. Their arrival stirred the whole town, and the women said, \uc1\u8216*Can this be Naomi?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Do not call me Naomi,\uc1\u8217* she said to them, \uc1\u8216*call me Mara{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   In Hebrew \uc1\u8216*Naomi\uc1\u8217* means \uc1\u8216*pleasant,\uc1\u8217* and \uc1\u8216*Mara\uc1\u8217* means \uc1\u8216*bitter.\uc1\u8217* }, for the Almighty has given me a bitter lot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I had plenty when I left, but the {\scaps Lord} has brought me back empty handed. Why should you call me Naomi, now that the {\scaps Lord} has afflicted me, and the Almighty has brought misfortune on me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Naomi and Ruth, her Moabite daughter-in-law, returned from Moab. They reached Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 In the Fields of Boaz

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Now Naomi was related through her husband to a very wealthy man of the family of Elimelech named Boaz.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi, \uc1\u8216*Let me now go into the fields and gather leftover grain behind anyone who will allow me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Go, my daughter,\uc1\u8217* she replied.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So she went to glean in the field after the reapers. As it happened, she was in that part of the field which belonged to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When Boaz came from Bethlehem and said to the reapers, \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} be with you,\uc1\u8217* they answered him, \uc1\u8216*May the {\scaps Lord} bless you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Whose girl is this?\uc1\u8217* Boaz asked his servant who had charge of the reapers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The servant who had charge of the reapers replied, \uc1\u8216*It is the Moabite girl who came back with Naomi from the territory of Moab.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}She asked to be allowed to glean and gather sheaves after the reapers. So she came and has continued to work until now and she has not rested a moment in the field.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then Boaz said to Ruth, \uc1\u8216*Listen, my daughter. Do not go to glean in another field nor leave this place, but stay here with my girls.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Watch where the men are reaping and follow the gleaners. I have told the young men not to trouble you. When you are thirsty, go to the jars and drink of that which the young men have drawn.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then she bowed low and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Why are you so kind to me, to take interest in me when I am just a foreigner?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Boaz replied, \uc1\u8216*I have heard what you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband, and how you left your father and mother and your native land to come to a people that you did not know before.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}May the {\scaps Lord} repay you for what you have done, and may you be fully rewarded by the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to take refuge.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then she said, \uc1\u8216*I trust I may please you, my lord, for you have comforted me and spoken kindly to your servant, although I am not really equal to one of your own servants.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}At mealtime Boaz said to Ruth, \uc1\u8216*Come here and eat some of the food and dip your piece of bread in the vinegar.\uc1\u8217* So she sat beside the reapers, and he passed her some roasted grain. She ate until she was satisfied and had some left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When she rose to glean, Boaz gave this order to his young men: \uc1\u8216*Let her glean even among the sheaves and do not disturb her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Also pull out some for her from the bundles and leave for her to glean, and do not find fault with her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So she gleaned in the field until evening, then beat out what she had gleaned. It was about a bushel of barley.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then she took it up and went into the town and showed her mother-in-law what she had gleaned. She also brought out and gave her that which she had left from her meal after she had had enough.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Where did you glean today, and where did you work?\uc1\u8217* asked her mother-in-law. \uc1\u8216*A blessing on him who took notice of you!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 So she told her mother-in-law where she had worked. \uc1\u8216*The name of the man with whom I worked today,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*is Boaz.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, \uc1\u8216*May the blessing of the {\scaps Lord} rest on this man who has not ceased to show his loving-kindness to the living and to the dead. The man,\uc1\u8217* she added, \uc1\u8216*is a near relation of ours.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*He told me,\uc1\u8217* Ruth said, \uc1\u8216*that I must keep near his young men until they have completed all his harvest.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Naomi said to Ruth, \uc1\u8216*It is best, my daughter, that you should go out with his girls because you might not be as safe in another field.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So she gleaned with the girls of Boaz until the end of the barley and wheat harvest; but she lived with her mother-in-law.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Night and morning

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}One day, Naomi said to Ruth, \uc1\u8216*My daughter, should I not seek to secure a home for you where you will be happy and prosperous?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Is not Boaz, with whose girls you have been, a relative of ours?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Tonight he is going to winnow barley on the threshing-floor. So bathe and anoint yourself and put on your best clothes and go down to the threshing-floor. But do not make yourself known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then when he lies down, mark the place where he lies. Go in, uncover his feet, lie down, and then he will tell you what to do.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*I will do as you say.\uc1\u8217* Ruth said to her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So she went down to the threshing-floor and did just as her mother-in-law told her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in a happy mood, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain. Then Ruth came quietly and uncovered his feet and lay down.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}At midnight the man was startled and turned over, and there was a woman lying at his feet!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Who are you?\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*I am Ruth your servant,\uc1\u8217* she answered, \uc1\u8216*Spread your cloak over your servant, for you are a near relative.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He said, \uc1\u8216*May you be blest by the {\scaps Lord}, my daughter. You have shown me greater favour now than at first, for you have not followed young men, whether poor or rich.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}My daughter, have no fear. I will do for you all that you ask, for the whole town knows that you are a virtuous woman.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Now it is true that I am a near relative, but there is another man nearer than I.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Stay here tonight, and then in the morning, if he will perform for you the duty of a kinsman, well, let him do it. But if he will not perform for you the duty of a kinsman, then as surely as the {\scaps Lord} lives, I will do it for you. Lie down until morning.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So she lay at his feet until morning, but rose before anyone could recognise her, for Boaz said, \uc1\u8216*No one must know that a woman came to the threshing-floor.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He also said, \uc1\u8216*Bring the cloak which you have on and hold it.\uc1\u8217* So she held it while he poured into it six measures of barley and laid it on her shoulders. Then he went into the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When Ruth came to her mother-in-law, Naomi asked, \uc1\u8216*Is it you, my daughter?\uc1\u8217* Then Ruth told Naomi all that the man had done for her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*He gave me these six measures of barley,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*for he said I should not go to my mother-in-law empty-handed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Wait quietly, my daughter.\uc1\u8217* Naomi said, \uc1\u8216*Until you know how the affair will turn out, for the man will not rest unless he settles it all today.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Then Boaz went up to the gate and sat down. Just then the near kinsman of whom Boaz had spoken came along. Boaz said, \uc1\u8216*Hello, So-and-so (calling him by name), come here and sit down.\uc1\u8217* So he stopped and sat down.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Boaz also took ten of the town elders and said, \uc1\u8216*Sit down here.\uc1\u8217* So they sat down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then he said to the near relative, \uc1\u8216*Naomi, who has come back from the country of Moab, is offering for sale the piece of land which belonged to our relative Elimelech,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and I thought that I would lay the matter before you, suggesting that you buy it in the presence of these men who sit here and of the elders of my people. If you will buy it and so keep it in the possession of the family, do so; but if not; then tell me, so that I may know; for no one but you has the right to buy it, and I am next to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*I will buy it,\uc1\u8217* he said.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Boaz said, \uc1\u8216*On the day you buy the field from Naomi, you must also marry Ruth the Moabite, the widow of the dead, in order to preserve the name of the dead in connection with his inheritance.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*I cannot buy it for myself without spoiling my own inheritance,\uc1\u8217* the near relative said. \uc1\u8216*You take my right of buying it as a relative, because I cannot do so.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now this used to be the custom in Israel: to make valid anything relating to a matter of redemption or exchange, a man drew off his sandal and gave it to the other man; and this was the way contracts were attested in Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So when the near relative said to Boaz, \uc1\u8216*Buy it for yourself,\uc1\u8217* Boaz drew off the man\uc1\u8217*s sandal.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Boaz said to the elders and to all the people, \uc1\u8216*You are witnesses at this time that I have bought all that was Elimelech\uc1\u8217*s and all that was Chilion\uc1\u8217*s and Mahlon\uc1\u8217*s from Naomi.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Moreover I have secured Ruth the Moabite, the wife of Mahlon, to be my wife, in order to perpetuate the name of the dead in connection with his inheritance, so that his name will not disappear from among his relatives and from the household where he lived. You are witnesses this day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then all the people who were at the gate and the elders said, \uc1\u8216*We are witnesses. May the {\scaps Lord} make the woman who is coming into your house like Rachel and Leah, who together built the house of Israel. May you do well in Ephrata, and become famous in Bethlehem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}From the children whom the {\scaps Lord} will give you by this young woman may your household become like the household of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So Boaz married Ruth, and she became his wife; and the {\scaps Lord} gave to her a son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the women said to Naomi, \uc1\u8216*Blessed be the {\scaps Lord} who has not left you at this time without a near relative, and may his name be famous in Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This child will restore your vigor and nourish you in your old age; for your daughter-in-law who loves you, who is worth more to you than seven sons, has borne a son to Boaz!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So Naomi took the child in her arms and cared for him as if he was her own.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The women of the neighbourhood gave him a name, saying, \uc1\u8216*A son is born to Naomi!\uc1\u8217* They named him Obed. He became the father of Jesse, who was the father of David.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Genealogy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This is the genealogy of Perez:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Perez was the father of Hezron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Hezron of Ram,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ram of Amminadab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Amminidab of Nashon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nashon of Salmon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Salmon of Boaz,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Boaz of Obed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Obed of Jesse,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Jesse of David.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Esther (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The Book of

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Esther

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Follies of a Despot

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}These events happened in the time of Ahasuerus, who ruled over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces from India to Ethiopia{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}from his royal throne in the fortified palace of Susa.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the third year of his reign, the king gave a feast for all his officers and courtiers. The commanders of the military forces of Persia and Media, the nobles and provincial rulers were present{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}while for one hundred and eighty days he showed them the glorious riches of his kingdom and the costliness of his magnificent regalia.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When these days were ended, the king held a banquet for all the people who were present in the royal palace at Susa, high and low alike. It was a seven days\uc1\u8217* feast in the enclosed garden of the royal palace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There were white and violet cotton curtains fastened to silver rings and pillars of marble with cords of fine purple wool and linen. The couches were of gold and silver placed upon a mosaic pavement of alabaster, white marble, mother-of-pearl, and dark stone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Drink was brought in vessels of gold \uc1\u8211* which were all different \uc1\u8211* and the king\uc1\u8217*s wine was provided with royal liberality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The drinking was unrestricted, for the king had directed all the officers of his household to let each man do as he pleased.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Queen Vashti also gave a feast for the women in the King Ahasuerus\uc1\u8217* royal palace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On the seventh day, when the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zathar and Carkas, his seven eunuch attendants{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}to bring Queen Vashti before him with the royal diadem on her head, to show her beauty to the people and the officials, for she was very beautiful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But Queen Vashti refused to come as the king commanded through the eunuchs. Then the king became very angry and his fury burned within him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The king turned to the wise men who knew the precedents, for it was his custom to confer with those wise in law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Those next to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena and Memucan, seven officials of Persia and Media who had access to the king and were highest in the kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Queen Vashti\uc1\u8217*, the king said, \uc1\u8216*has failed to obey my royal command \uc1\u8211* the command of King Ahasuerus conveyed through the eunuchs! What does the law say should be done to her?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Memucan replied before the king and the officials, \uc1\u8216*Queen Vashti has done wrong not only to the king but also to all the officials and to all the peoples in all of the king\uc1\u8217*s provinces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The refusal of the queen will be reported to all the women with the result that it will make them despise their husbands. They will say, \uc1\u8220*King Ahasuerus commanded Queen Vashti to be brought in before him, but she did not come!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This very day the ladies of Persia and Media who have heard of the refusal of the queen will tell it to all the king\uc1\u8217*s officials, and there will be contempt and strife!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}If it seems best to the king, let him send out a royal edict. Let it be written among the laws of Persia and Media, never to be repealed, that Vashti may never again come before King Ahasuerus. Let the king give her place as queen to another who is more worthy than she.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When the king\uc1\u8217*s decree which he makes is heard throughout his kingdom \uc1\u8211* great as it is \uc1\u8211* the wives of all classes will give honour to their husbands.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The proposal pleased the king and the officials, and the king did as Memucan advised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He sent letters to all the provinces, to every province in its own system of writing and to every people in their language, that every man should be master in his own house!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Choosing a Queen

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Some time later, when the wrath of King Ahasuerus had subsided, he remembered what Vashti had done and what had been decreed against her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then the king\uc1\u8217*s servants who waited upon him said, \uc1\u8216*Let beautiful young virgins be sought for the king,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and let the king appoint commissioners to all the provinces of his kingdom to gather them all to Susa the royal residence. Let them be brought into the women\uc1\u8217*s quarters under the custody of Hegai, the king\uc1\u8217*s eunuch, who has charge of the women. Then give them what is needed to make them beautiful,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and let the girl who pleases the king be queen instead of Vashti.\uc1\u8217* The proposal pleased the king so he put it into action.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In Susa the royal residence lived a Jew named Mordecai. He was son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Kish, a Benjamite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}(Kish had been carried away from Jerusalem with the exiles who were deported with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon took captive.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Mordecai had adopted Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle\uc1\u8217*s daughter, since she had neither father nor mother. The girl was shapely and beautiful; and after her father and mother died, Mordecai raised her as if she was his own daughter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When the king\uc1\u8217*s command and decree were known, many girls were gathered together to Susa the capital under the custody of Hegai. Esther was also taken into the king\uc1\u8217*s palace and placed under the custody of Hegai, who had charge of the women.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The girl pleased him and gained his favour, so that he quickly gave her the cosmetics she needed to enhance her beauty and her allowance of food and the seven maids selected from the king\uc1\u8217*s household. He also transferred her and her maids to the best place in the harem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Esther had not revealed her people nor her family background because Mordecai had ordered her not to.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Every day Mordecai would to walk in front of the courtyard of the harem and ask after Esther\uc1\u8217*s health and what was happening to her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The girls were prepared for meeting King Ahasuerus for twelve months: six months being treated with oil of myrrh and six months with perfumes and cosmetics. After the twelve months,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}each girl went in to the king. She was allowed to take with her whatever she wished from the women\uc1\u8217*s quarters,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and would enter the palace in the evening and return the next morning to another part of the harem under the care of the king\uc1\u8217*s eunuch Shaashgaz who was in charge of concubines. She would not go to the king again unless he desired her and summoned her by name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When it was the turn of Esther (the girl adopted by Mordecai, daughter of his uncle Abihail) to go in to the king, she only took with her those things that Hegai, the king\uc1\u8217*s eunuch in charge of the women, had advised her to take. Esther was liked by all who saw her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus in the royal palace in the tenth month, the month of Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And the king loved her more than all the other women, and she became his favourite and won his affection. He placed the royal diadem on her head and made her queen instead of Vashti.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then the king gave a great feast to all his officials and courtiers in honour of Esther, and he remitted the taxes of the provinces and distributed gifts with royal liberality.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}All the time the virgins were assembled again, Mordecai was sitting as an offical at the king\uc1\u8217*s gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Esther had not revealed her people or family background because she still obeyed him as she had when he was bringing her up.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Hatred without Pity

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}In those days while Mordecai was sitting in the king\uc1\u8217*s gate, two of the royal court attendants, Bigthan and Teresh, who guarded the entrance of the palace, became enraged and attempted to kill King Ahasuerus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Mordecai learned of the conspiracy and disclosed it to Queen Esther, and she told the king on Mordecai\uc1\u8217*s behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When the affair was investigated and the facts discovered, the conspirators were both hanged on the gallows. The incident was recorded in the presence of the king in the daily record of events.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}After these events King Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him to a place above all the officials who were with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}All the king\uc1\u8217*s courtiers who were in the king\uc1\u8217*s gate used to bow down before Haman, for so the king had commanded, but Mordecai did not bow down nor prostrate himself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the king\uc1\u8217*s courtiers, who were in the king\uc1\u8217*s gate, said to Mordecai, \uc1\u8216*Why do you disobey the king\uc1\u8217*s command?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When they had spoken to him day after day without his listening to them, they informed Haman, to see whether Mordecai\uc1\u8217*s acts would be tolerated, for he had told them that he was a Jew.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Haman saw that Mordecai did not bow down nor prostrate himself before him, he was furious.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But it seemed to him beneath his dignity to lay hands on Mordecai alone, for they had told him who Mordecai\uc1\u8217*s people were. Instead Haman sought to destroy all the people of Mordecai, all the Jews throughout the kingdom of Ahasuerus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In the first month (the month of Nisan) in the twelfth year of the reign of King Ahasuerus, Haman had \uc1\u8220*pur\uc1\u8221* (which means \uc1\u8220*lot\uc1\u8221*) cast before him to determine the best day and best month for his actions. The lot fell on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month \uc1\u8211* the month of Adar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So Haman said to King Ahasuerus, \uc1\u8216*There is a certain people scattered among the peoples in all the provinces of your kingdom, whose laws differ from those of every other and who do not keep the king\uc1\u8217*s laws. Therefore it is not right for the king to tolerate them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If it seems best to the king, let an order be given to destroy them, and I will pay ten thousand silver coins into the royal treasury.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So the king took off his signet ring from his hand and gave it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*The money is yours,\uc1\u8217* the king said to Haman, \uc1\u8216*and the people also to do with them as you wish.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so, on the thirteenth day of the first month, the king\uc1\u8217*s secretaries were summoned and as Haman instructed an edict was issued to the king\uc1\u8217*s satraps and provincial governors and the rulers of each of the peoples in their own script and their own language. The edict was written in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with his ring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Dispatches were sent by couriers to all the king\uc1\u8217*s provinces, saying: Destroy, kill, put an end to all the Jews, young and old, little children and women, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, and plunder their possessions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}A copy of the edict was to be published as a decree in every province \uc1\u8211* publicly displayed so that everyone might be ready for that day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}By command of the king the couriers raced off, and the edict was published in Susa itself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Then the king and Haman sat down to drink, but the city of Susa was in turmoil.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Queen\uc1\u8217*s Efforts to Save Her People

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}When Mordecai learned all that had been done, he tore his clothes and put on sackcloth and strewed ashes on his head, and went out into the city and raised a loud and bitter cry of lamentation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He went as far as the king\uc1\u8217*s gate, but no one could enter the gate clothed with sackcloth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In every province, wherever the king\uc1\u8217*s command and decree went, there was great mourning, fasting, weeping, and wailing among the Jews. Many of them sat in sackcloth and ashes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When Esther\uc1\u8217*s maids and attendants told her about Mordecai\uc1\u8217*s behaviour, she was greatly troubled. She sent garments for Mordecai to put on, so that he could take off his sack-cloth, but he would not accept them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So Esther called Hathach, one of the king\uc1\u8217*s eunuchs whom he had appointed to attend her, and ordered him to go to Mordecai to learn what it all meant and the reason for it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Hathach went out to Mordecai, to the city square in front of the king\uc1\u8217*s gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Mordecai told him all that had happened to him and the exact amount of money that Haman had promised to pay into the king\uc1\u8217*s treasury for the destruction of the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Also he gave him a copy of the decree to destroy them, that had been published in Susa, to show to Esther for her information. He also told her to go to the king and implore his mercy and to plead with him in behalf of her people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When Hathach came and told Esther what Mordecai had said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}she instructed Hathach to go and say to Mordecai,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*All the king\uc1\u8217*s courtiers and the people of the king\uc1\u8217*s provinces know that for every man or woman who goes to the king into the inner court without being called there is one penalty, death, unless the king holds out the golden sceptre signifying that they may live. It has been thirty days since I have been called to go in to the king.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When Mordecai was told what Esther had said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}he sent back this reply to Esther, \uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t imagine that you alone of all the Jews will escape because you belong to the king\uc1\u8217*s household.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If you persist in remaining silent at this time, relief and deliverance will come to the Jews from another quarter, but you and your family will perish. Who knows? Maybe you have been raised to the throne for a time like this!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then Esther sent this message to Mordecai:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Go, gather all the Jews in Susa and fast for me. Don\uc1\u8217*t eat nor drink anything for three days and nights. My maids and I will fast as well. Then I will go in to the king, although it is contrary to the law, and if I die, I die.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Mordecai did everything Esther had directed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}On the third day, Esther put on her regalia and stood in the inner court of the royal palace opposite the king\uc1\u8217*s house. The king was sitting on his throne in the palace, opposite the entrance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When he saw Esther the queen standing in the court, she won his favour, and he held out to her the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther approached and touched the top of the sceptre.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the king said to her, \uc1\u8216*What is it, Queen Esther? Whatever your request is, it will be granted, even if it is the half of the kingdom.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*If it seems best to the king,\uc1\u8217* Esther said, \uc1\u8216*let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the king ordered, \uc1\u8216*Bring Haman quickly, so that Esther\uc1\u8217*s wish may be gratified.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 So the king and Haman went to the banquet that Esther had prepared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}While they were drinking wine, the king said to Esther, \uc1\u8216*Whatever your petition is, it will be granted. Your request, it will be done \uc1\u8211* even if it takes half of my kingdom.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Esther answered,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*If I have won the king\uc1\u8217*s favour and if it seems best to the king to grant my petition and to accede to my request, my petition and my request are that the king and Haman come to the banquet which I will prepare for them. Tomorrow I will answer the king\uc1\u8217*s question as he wishes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Haman went out that day joyful and elated, but when he saw Mordecai in the king\uc1\u8217*s gate and noticed that he neither stood up nor moved for him, he was furiously angry with Mordecai.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nevertheless Haman restrained himself and went home. He called together his friends and Zeresh his wife{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and recounted to them the greatness of his wealth, how many children he had, and all the ways in which the king had honoured him, and how he had promoted him above the officials and the royal courtiers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*What is more,\uc1\u8217* Haman said, \uc1\u8216*Queen Esther brought no one in with the king to the banquet which she had prepared except me, and tomorrow also I am invited by her along with the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yet all this does not satisfy me as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king\uc1\u8217*s gate.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends said to him, \uc1\u8216*Let a gallows seventy-five feet high be erected, and in the morning speak to the king and let Mordecai be hanged on it. Then go merrily with the king to the banquet.\uc1\u8217* The advice pleased Haman, and so he had the gallows erected.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Downfall of a Conspirator

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}On that night the king was unable to sleep, so he gave orders to bring the books that recorded memorable deeds, and they were read before the king.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It was found recorded how Mordecai had furnished information regarding Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king\uc1\u8217*s attendants who guarded the entrance of the palace, who had attempted to kill King Ahasuerus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*What honour and dignity have been conferred on Mordecai for this?\uc1\u8217* the king asked. When the king\uc1\u8217*s pages who waited on him replied \uc1\u8216*Nothing has been done for him,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}the king said, \uc1\u8216*Who is in the court?\uc1\u8217* Now Haman had just entered the outer court of the king\uc1\u8217*s house to speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the king\uc1\u8217*s pages said to him, \uc1\u8216*Haman is standing there, in the court.\uc1\u8217* The king said, \uc1\u8216*Let him enter.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Haman entered, and the king said to him, \uc1\u8216*What should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honour?\uc1\u8217* Haman said to himself, \uc1\u8216*Whom besides me could the king wish to honour?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he said to the king, \uc1\u8216*For the man whom the king wishes to honour{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}let a royal garment be brought, which the king has worn, and the horse on which the king has ridden and on whose head a royal diadem has been placed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then let the garment and the horse be placed in charge of one of the king\uc1\u8217*s noble officials. Let him clothe the man whom the king wishes to honour and let him lead that man on the horse through the city square, proclaiming before him, \uc1\u8220*This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honour.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the king said to Haman, \uc1\u8216*Make haste and take the garment and the horse, as you have said, and do this to Mordecai the Jew, who sits in the king\uc1\u8217*s gate. Omit nothing of all you have said.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So Haman took the garment and the horse and clothed Mordecai, and made him ride through the city square and proclaimed before him, \uc1\u8216*This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honour.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Mordecai returned to the king\uc1\u8217*s gate, but Haman hurried to his house, mourning, with his head covered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and to all his friends everything that had happened to him. Then his wise men and Zeresh his wife said to him, \uc1\u8216*If Mordecai before whom you have already been humiliated is of the Jewish people, you can do nothing against him but will surely fall before him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}While they were still talking with him, the king\uc1\u8217*s attendants came and quickly took Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}So the king and Haman went to drink with Queen Esther.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}As they were drinking wine on that second day, the king again said to Esther, \uc1\u8216*Whatever your petition is, Queen Esther, it will be granted to you. Whatever you request it will be done, even if it takes half of the kingdom.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Queen Esther answered, \uc1\u8216*Your Majesty, if I have won your favour, and if it seems best to Your Majesty, let my life be given me as my petition, and my people as my request,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for I and my people have been sold to be destroyed, killed, and completely annihilated! If we had been merely sold into slavery I would not have disturbed your peace, because such a fate would not have affected the interests of the king.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther, \uc1\u8216*Who is he and where is he whose heart has impelled him to do this?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*A foe, an enemy: this wicked Haman.\uc1\u8217* Esther answered. Haman shrank in terror before the king and the queen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In his wrath the king rose from the place where he was drinking wine and went into the palace garden. Haman stayed to beg Queen Esther for his life, for he saw that the king was fully determined to bring calamity upon him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}As the king returned from the palace garden to the banquet hall, Haman had flung himself on Esther\uc1\u8217*s couch. The king cried, \uc1\u8216*Is he going to rape my queen while I am present in my own house?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 As the king spoke these words, the attendants covered Haman\uc1\u8217*s face{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and Harbonah, one of those who waited on the king, said, \uc1\u8216*There are the gallows, seventy-five feet high, which Hainan erected for Mordecai, who spoke a good word in behalf of the king, standing in the house of Haman!\uc1\u8217* The king said \uc1\u8216*Hang him on them.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the wrath of the king was pacified.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Deliverance of the Jews

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}At that time King Ahasuerus gave the property of Haman the Jews\uc1\u8217* enemy to Queen Esther. Mordecai was made one of the king\uc1\u8217*s personal advisers, for Esther had disclosed his relationship to her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The king also drew off his signet ring, which he had taken from Haman. He gave it to Mordecai, and Esther placed Mordecai in charge of Haman\uc1\u8217*s property.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Esther sought another audience with the king and fell at his feet and with tears begged him to avert the evil planned by Haman the Agagite and to frustrate his designs against the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The king held out to her the golden sceptre, and she arose and stood before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*If it seems best to the king,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*and if I have won his favour and he thinks it right, and if I please him, let written orders be given to revoke the dispatches devised by Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote ordering the destruction of the Jews who are in all the king\uc1\u8217*s provinces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For how can I bear to look upon the evil that will come to my people? How can I bear to see their destruction?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, \uc1\u8216*See, I have given Esther the property of Haman, and they have hanged him on the gallows, because he laid hands upon the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now you write on behalf of the Jews, as seems best to you, in the king\uc1\u8217*s name and seal it with the king\uc1\u8217*s signet ring. For a document that is written in the king\uc1\u8217*s name and sealed with the king\uc1\u8217*s signet ring cannot be revoked.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On the twenty-third day of the third month (that is the month of Sivan), the king\uc1\u8217*s secretaries were summoned and as Mordecai instructed an edict was issued to the Jews, to the satraps and provincial governors and the rulers of each of the one hundred twenty-seven provinces from India to Ethiopia in their own script and their own language, and to the Jews in their own script and language.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Mordecai wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus. He sealed it with the king\uc1\u8217*s signet ring. Dispatches were sent by mounted couriers who rode the swift, noble steeds, bred of the royal studs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In this way the king permitted the Jews who were in every city to gather together and make a stand for their life, to destroy, to kill, and annihilate all the armed forces of any people or province that might be hostile to them, including their children and women, and to take their goods as plunder{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus on that thirteenth day of the twelfth month (which is called Adar).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}A copy of the edict was to be published as a decree in every province \uc1\u8211* publicly displayed so that the Jews might be ready for that day and avenge themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So the couriers who rode the swift, noble steeds went out, hastened and impelled by the king\uc1\u8217*s commands!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Meantime the decree had been given out in the royal palace at Susa;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and Mordecai had gone out from the presence of the king in royal garments of violet and white and with a great crown of gold and with a robe of fine linen and purple. The people of Susa shouted and were glad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To the Jews there came light and gladness and joy and honour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And in every province and city, wherever the king\uc1\u8217*s command and decree came, there was gladness and joy among the Jews and a holiday. Many of the peoples of the earth professed to be Jews, for fear of the Jews took possession of them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Now in the twelfth month (that is the month of Adar), on the thirteenth day, when the king\uc1\u8217*s command and his decree was about to put into execution, on the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to gain the mastery over them, then the tables were turned so that the Jews had the mastery over those who hated them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The Jews gathered together in the cities throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, to attack anyone who tried to harm them. No one could withstand them, for the fear of them had fallen on all the peoples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}All the princes of the provinces and the satraps and the governors and they who attended to the king\uc1\u8217*s business, helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai had fallen on them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For Mordecai was great in the king\uc1\u8217*s palace, and as his power increased his fame spread throughout all the provinces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The Jews put all their enemies to the sword and, with slaughter and destruction, they did what they wanted to those who hated them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In Susa the capital the Jews killed five hundred people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They killed Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Parmashta, Arisia, Aridai, and Vaizatha,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Jews\uc1\u8217* enemy; but they did not take any plunder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On that day the number of those who were slain in Susa was brought before the king,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and the king said to Queen Esther, \uc1\u8216*The Jews have slain five hundred people in Susa, and the ten sons of Haman. What then have they done in the rest of the king\uc1\u8217*s provinces! Now what is your petition? It will be granted to you. What is your request? It will be done.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*If it please the king,\uc1\u8217* Esther said, \uc1\u8216*let it be granted to the Jews who are in Susa to do tomorrow also according to this day\uc1\u8217*s decree. Let the bodies of Haman\uc1\u8217*s ten sons be hanged on the gallows.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the king commanded it to be done. A decree was given out in Susa and they hung the bodies of Haman\uc1\u8217*s ten sons on the gallows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The Jews who were in Susa gathered themselves together again on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar. They killed three hundred people in Susa. But they did not take any plunder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the other Jews who were in the king\uc1\u8217*s provinces gathered themselves together and fought for their lives and overcame their enemies. They killed seventy-five thousand who hated them. But they did not take any plunder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This was on the thirteenth day of Adar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 On the fourteenth day of the month Adar the Jews rested and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}(But the Jews in Susa gathered on both the thirteenth and fourteenth day \uc1\u8211* and rested on the fifteenth day of the same month and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This is why the Jews who live in the country villages keep the fourteenth day of the month of Adar as a day of rejoicing and feasting and a holiday, and a day in which they send gifts of food to each other.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Establishment of Purim

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Mordecai had these things recorded. He sent letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus, both near and far.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He told them to keep the fourteenth day of the month of Adar and also the fifteenth day every year,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}as the days on which the Jews had rest from their enemies, and the month which was turned from sorrow to gladness and from mourning into a feast day. They should make them days of feasting and gladness and of sending gifts of food to each other and of gifts to the poor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So what the Jews had begun to do they adopted as a custom, just as Mordecai had written to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted to destroy them. He had cast \uc1\u8220*Pur\uc1\u8221*, that is the lot, intending to consume them and to destroy them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But when the matter came before the king, he gave written orders that his wicked plot, which he had planned against the Jews, should come upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}This is why these days are called Purim, after the word Pur. Therefore because of all the words of this letter, as well as all they had seen, and all they had experienced,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}the Jews established and made it a custom for them, for their descendants, and for all who should join them, so that it might not be repealed, that they should continue to observe these two days as feasts each year,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city. And these days of Purim should not pass away from among the Jews nor the remembrance of them disappear among their descendants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Queen Esther, the daughter of Abihail, gave Mordecai the Jew all authority in writing to confirm this second letter of Purim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}He sent letters to all the Jews, to the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, wishing them peace and security,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}to confirm these days of Purim in their proper times, to be observed as Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther had directed and as the Jews had proscribed for themselves and their descendants, in the matter of the fastings and their cry of lamentation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And the commands of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it was written in the records.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}King Ahasuerus imposed a tribute on the land and the coasts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}All the acts of his power and of his might, and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai to which the king advanced him, are they not recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For Mordecai the Jew was next in rank to King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and loved by them all. He sought the good of his people and promoted the welfare of their descendants.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Psalms (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Psalms

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 Book One

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 1 \uc1\u8211* The Way of Happiness

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}Happy are those
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who do not follow the counsel of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not halting in ways frequented by sinners,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor taking a seat in a gathering of scoffers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But the law of the {\scaps Lord} is their joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they study it day and night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They are like trees
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 planted by runlets of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yielding fruit in due season,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 leaves never fading.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In all that they do, they prosper.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Not so fare the wicked, not so;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like chaff are they, blown by the wind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the wicked will not stand firm in the judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor sinners appear, when the righteous are gathered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For the way of the righteous is dear to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the way of the wicked will end in ruin.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 2 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Chosen King

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Why this turmoil of nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 this futile plotting of peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}with kings of the earth conspiring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rulers consulting together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 against the {\scaps Lord} and against his anointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}to snap their bonds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fling their cords away?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He whose throne is in heaven laughs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} mocks them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then he speaks to them in his wrath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in his hot anger confounds them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*This my king is installed by me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on Zion my holy mountain.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will tell of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s decree.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He said to me: \uc1\u8216*You are my son,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 this day I became your father.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Only ask, and I make you the heir of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lord of the world to its utmost bounds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You will break them with sceptre of iron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shatter them like pottery.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So now, you kings, be wise:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be warned, you rulers of earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Serve the {\scaps Lord} in awe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 kiss his feet with trembling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}lest, angry, he hurl you to ruin;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for soon will his fury blaze.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Happy all who take refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 3 \uc1\u8211* A Morning Prayer for Protection

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 3} A psalm of David, when he fled from his son Absalom.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How many, {\scaps Lord}, are my foes!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Those who rise up against me are many.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Many are those who say of me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*There is no help for him in his God.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But you, {\scaps Lord}, are shield about me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my glory, who lifts up my head.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When loudly I call to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from his holy hill he gives answer. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I laid down and slept:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 now I wake, for the {\scaps Lord} sustains me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I fear not the myriads of people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who beset me on every side.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Arise, {\scaps Lord}: save me, my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who strikes all my foes on the cheek,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and shatters the teeth of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Victory belongs to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let your blessing descend on your people. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 4 \uc1\u8211* An Evening Prayer

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 4} For the leader, with stringed instruments. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Answer my cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God, my defender.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Often from straits you have brought me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to spacious places.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So now show me your favour
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and hear my prayer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How long, you proud people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will my honour be stained
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 by the slanders you love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the lies that you follow? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}See! The {\scaps Lord} has shown me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his wonderful kindness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} hears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I call to him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Sin not in your anger:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but speak in your heart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on your bed, and be still. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Offer true sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 trust in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Many are longing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for fortune to smile.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lift upon us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the light of your face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You have put in my heart, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a deeper joy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 than was theirs who had corn
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and wine in abundance.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So in peace I will
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lie down and sleep;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you, {\scaps Lord}, keep me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 safe.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 5 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Guidance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 5} For the leader: A psalm of David, to be accompanied by the flute.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Hear my words, {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 give heed to my whisper.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Attend to my loud cry for help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my king and my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When I pray to you, {\scaps Lord}, in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hear my voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I make ready for you in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and look for a sign.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For you are no God who takes pleasure in wickedness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no one of evil can be your guest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}No braggarts can stand in your presence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you hate all workers of wrong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You destroy all speakers of lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 people of blood and deceit you abhor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But I, through your kindness abundant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may enter your house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and towards the shrine of your temple
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may reverently bow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Lead me, {\scaps Lord}, in your righteousness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of my enemies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Make your way level before me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For their mouth is a stranger to truth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their heart is a pit of destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their throat is a wide open grave,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their tongue the smooth tongue of the hypocrite.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Condemn them, God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let their schemes bring them down to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For their numberless crimes thrust them down
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for playing the rebel against you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But let all who take refuge in you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ring out their gladness forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Protect those who love your name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so they may exult in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For you give your blessing, {\scaps Lord}, to the godly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the shield of your favour protects them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 6 \uc1\u8211* A Cry for Help in Time of Trouble

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 6} For the leader; with instrumental music on the sheminith. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Rebuke me not, {\scaps Lord}, in your anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 punish me not in your wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Lord}, be gracious to me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in my weakness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Heal me {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for racked is my body;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}all of me utterly racked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why do you wait so long, {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Turn, {\scaps Lord}, rescue me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 save me, because of your love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For in death none can call you to mind;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in Sheol who can praise you?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I am so weary of sighing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All the night I make my bed swim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and wet my couch with my tears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}My eyes swollen with grief;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from weeping caused by my foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Begone, workers of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the {\scaps Lord} has heard my loud weeping,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}the {\scaps Lord} has heard my entreaty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} accepts my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}My foes will be stricken with terror,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 brought to shame and dismay in a moment.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 7 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer to the God of Justice

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 7} A Shiggaion of David, which he sang to the {\scaps Lord} about Cush, the Benjamite.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps Lord} my God, I take refuge in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Deliver me, save me from all who pursue me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}or like lions they will tear me to pieces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rend me, past hope of rescue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, my God, if my life has been such
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 if my hands have been stained with guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}if friends I paid back with evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 if I plundered my foes without cause,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}may the enemy chase and find me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
  trample my life to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my honour leave in the dirt! {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Arise, {\scaps Lord}, in anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 against my foes rise in fury.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Awake for my help:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let justice be done.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Gather the nations about you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and sit on your lofty throne,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}as the {\scaps Lord}, the judge of the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Judge me, {\scaps Lord}, in my innocence
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and according to my integrity.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Put an end to the wrong of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 protect the righteous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Searcher of hearts and minds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 righteous God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}God is my shield:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he saves the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}God is a just judge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 constant in righteous anger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He will sharpen his sword without fail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his bow is bent and ready,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}his deadly weapons are ready,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his arrows he makes of flame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The enemy who conceives evil;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pregnant with mischief,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 giving birth to lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}a pit they have made and dug;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but into the hole that they made they will fall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}On their own heads their mischief comes back;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on their own skulls their violence comes down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and sing to the name of the {\scaps Lord} Most High.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 8 \uc1\u8211* God\uc1\u8217*s Glory in Nature

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 8} For the leader: A psalm of David, to be accompanied by a stringed instrument.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps Lord} our God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How glorious in all the earth is your name!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your praise reaches as high as the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}from the mouths of children and infants.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You have built a fortress
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 against your enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to silence the foe and the rebel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When I look at your heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the work of your fingers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the moon and the stars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which you have set there,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}what are mortals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you think of them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 humans,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you visit them?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet you made them little less than divine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 crowned them with glory and majesty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}made them lord of the works of your hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 put all things under their feet \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}sheep and oxen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all of them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the wild beasts also:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}birds of the air,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fish of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all that crosses the paths of the ocean.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Lord} our God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How glorious in all the earth is your name!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 9 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Praise the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Justice

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 9} For the leader; \uc1\u8217*almuth labben. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
With all my heart I will praise the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all your wonders I will rehearse.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will rejoice and exult in you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 singing praise to your name, Most High;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}because backward my foes were turned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they stumbled and perished before you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My right and my claim you have upheld,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did sit on the throne as a fair judge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}rebuking the nations, destroying the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and blotting their name out forever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The foe is vanished, ruined forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their cities destroyed, their memory perished.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}See! The {\scaps Lord} is seated forever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the throne he established for judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}ruling the world with justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and judging the nations with equity.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So the {\scaps Lord} proves a haven to the oppressed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a haven in times of trouble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Well may they trust you who know your name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for those who seek you, you never abandon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Sing praise to the {\scaps Lord}, whose home is in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 declare his deeds among the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As avenger of blood, he keeps them in mind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he does not forget the cry of the wretched.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Show me favour, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 see how my foes afflict me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lift me up from the gates of death;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}so I may, in your help exulting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tell forth your praise at the gates of Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The nations are sunk in the pit which they made,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the net that they hid, their own foot is entangled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} is revealed in the judgment he wrought,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the wicked are snared in their own handiwork. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Let the wicked depart to Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the nations that live forgetful of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For the needy will not be always forgotten,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the hope of the helpless be lost forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Arise, {\scaps Lord}; don\uc1\u8217*t let them triumph:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before your face let the nations be judged.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Strike them with fear, {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 show the nations how frail they are. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 10 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Help

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Why do you stand, {\scaps Lord}, so far away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hiding yourself in times of trouble?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The wicked, in their pride, are pursuing the helpless:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let them be caught in the schemes they have plotted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For the wicked boasts of their wanton greed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the robber despises the {\scaps Lord}, and curses him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}in wicked pride, thinks:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God doesn\uc1\u8217*t care,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God doesn\uc1\u8217*t call to account.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Never a season that they do not prosper;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your judgments are far above out of their sight:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they scoff at their foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Each says in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will never be shaken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will live for all time
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 untouched by misfortune.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Their mouths are full of deceit and oppression:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 under their tongues lurks mischief and wrong.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Lying in secret in some village ambush,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and stealthily watching, they murder the innocent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Like a lion that lurks in a secret lair
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they lurk intending to catch the defenceless;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to seize them, to drag them away in their net.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Their victims are crushed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sink down to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Under their claws
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the hapless fall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The wicked say in their hearts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that God has forgotten,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 has hidden his face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will see nothing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Arise, {\scaps Lord}, lift up your hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 do not forget the cry of the wretched.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Why do the wicked treat God with contempt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and say in their hearts, \uc1\u8216*God doesn\uc1\u8217*t care\uc1\u8217*?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You have seen the trouble and sorrow;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you mark it all, and will take it in hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The hapless can count on you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 helper of orphans.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Break the arm of the wicked and evil:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 search out their sin, till no more be found.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} is king forever and ever:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the nations will vanish from his land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Lord}, you have heard the desire of the humble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 inclining your ear, strengthening their hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}rights you have won for the crushed and the orphan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so no one on earth may strike terror again.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 11 \uc1\u8211* Trust in the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 11} For the leader. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In the {\scaps Lord} I take refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How can you tell me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to flee like a bird to the mountains?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*See! The wicked are bending the bow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their arrow is set on the string,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to shoot from the shadows at the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In this tearing down of foundations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 what good can a good person do?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} in his holy temple,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} in heaven, enthroned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His eyes watch the world,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they see everyone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} examines the righteous and wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the lover of violence he hates.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}On the wicked he rains coals of fire and brimstone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their drink will be scorching wind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the {\scaps Lord} is just, and justice he loves;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so the upright will see his face.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 12 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Faithful in a False World

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 12} For the leader; on the sheminith. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Help, {\scaps Lord}, for the good are all gone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 faithful people have vanished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}One lies to another, speaking empty lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with flattering lips and false hearts they speak.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}May the {\scaps Lord} cut off all the flattering lips,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the tongue that utters arrogance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}they declare, \uc1\u8216*Our tongue is our strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our allies our lips: who is lord over us?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*The poor are despoiled, and the needy are sighing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so now I will act,\uc1\u8217* the {\scaps Lord} declares
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*And place them in the safety they long for.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The words of the {\scaps Lord} are words that are pure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 silver smelted, seven times refined.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You will keep us, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and guard us from this generation forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}in a world where the wicked prowl,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and worthless people exalted.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 13 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Help in Trouble

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 13} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How long, {\scaps Lord}, will you forget me forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How long will you hide your face from me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How long must I nurse grief inside me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in my heart a daily sorrow?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How long are my foes to exult over me?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Look at me, answer me, {\scaps Lord} my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Fill my eyes with your light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lest I sleep in death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}lest my enemies claim to have triumphed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lest my foes rejoice at my downfall.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But I trust in your kindness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heart will rejoice in your help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will sing to the {\scaps Lord} who was good to me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 14 \uc1\u8211* The Folly of Denying God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 14} For the leader. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Fools say in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*There is no God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Vile, hateful their life is;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not one does good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}From heaven the {\scaps Lord} looks out
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on humans, to see
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 if any are wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and care for God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But all have turned bad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the taint is on all;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not one does good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no, not one.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Have they learned their lesson,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those workers of evil?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who ate up my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 eating, devouring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 never calling to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Sore afraid will they be;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for God is among
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those who are righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}you may mock the plans of the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} is their refuge.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If only help from Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 would come for Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When the {\scaps Lord} brings his people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a change of fortune,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 how glad will be Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Israel how joyful!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 15 \uc1\u8211* Standing Firm

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 15} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps Lord}, who can be guest in your tent?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who may live on your holy mountain?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The person whose walk is blameless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose conduct is right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose words are true and sincere;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}on whose tongue there sits no slander,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who will not harm a friend,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}nor cruelly insult a neighbour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who regards with contempt those rejected by God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but honours those who obey the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who keeps an oath, whatever the cost,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}whose money is lent without interest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and never takes a bribe to hurt the innocent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The person who does these things will always stand firm.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 16 \uc1\u8211* The Joy of Fellowship with God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 16} A michtam of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Keep me, O God, for in you I take refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I said to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*You are my {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 my happiness rests in you alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Those who are holy in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they, they alone, are the noble ones;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all my delight is in them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Those who choose other gods
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 find endless sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In their offerings of blood I will have no part
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor take their name on my lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} is my share and my portion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my fate is in your strong hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The boundary lines of my life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 mark out delightful country,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heritage pleases me well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I praise the {\scaps Lord} for his counsel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which so stirs my heart in the night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I keep the {\scaps Lord} always in mind:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with him at my hand, I can never be moved.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So my heart is glad, there is joy inside me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in safety of body I live.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For you will not give me up to Sheol
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor let any who love you see the pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You will show me the path that leads to life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to that fulness of joy which is in your presence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the pleasures dispensed by your hand evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 17 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 17} A prayer of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Listen, O {\scaps Lord}, to my innocence;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend to my piercing cry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Give heed to my prayer
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 out of lips unfeigned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let my vindication come from you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your eyes see the truth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When you test my heart when you visit at night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and assay me like silver \uc1\u8211* you can find no evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I am determined that my mouth should not lie.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I gave earnest heed to the words of your lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My steps have held fast to the paths of your precepts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in your tracks have my feet never stumbled.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So I call you, O God, with assurance of answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bend down your ear to me, hear what I say.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Show your marvellous love, you who save from enemies
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those who take refuge at your right hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Keep me as the apple of the eye,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hide me in the shelter of your wings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}From wicked people who do me violence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from deadly foes who crowd around me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They have closed their hearts to pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the words of their mouths are haughty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now they dog us at every step,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 keenly watching, to hurl us to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}like a lion, longing to tear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like a young lion, lurking in secret.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Arise, {\scaps Lord}, face them and fell them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By your sword set me free from the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}by your hand, O {\scaps Lord}, from those \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose portion of life is but of this world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But let your treasured ones have food in plenty
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may their children be full and their children satisfied.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}In my innocence I will see your face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 awake I am filled with a vision of you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 18 \uc1\u8211* A King\uc1\u8217*s Song of Gratitude

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 18} For the leader. Of David, the servant of the {\scaps Lord}, who recited the words of this song to the {\scaps Lord} after the {\scaps Lord} had saved him from the power of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. He said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I love you, O {\scaps Lord}, my strength.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} is my rock, my fortress, deliverer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God, my rock, where I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my shield, my defender, my tower.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Worthy of praise is the {\scaps Lord} whom I call on,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he rescues me from all my foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The waves of death broke about me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 fearful floods of chaos.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Sheol threw cords around me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 snares of death came to meet me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In distress I cried to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and shouted for help to my God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in his temple he heard my voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 into his ears came my cry.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then the earth shook and quaked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 mountains trembled to their foundations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and quaked because of his wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Smoke went up from his nostrils,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 devouring fire from his mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 coals were kindled by it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then he bent the sky and came down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 thick darkness was under his feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He rode on a cherub and flew,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 darting on wings of wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}with his screen of darkness about him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in thick dark clouds of water.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}At the radiance before him there passed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hailstones and coals of fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} thundered from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the Most High uttered his voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He shot his arrows and scattered them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 flashed lightnings, and routed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The channels of the sea were revealed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the world was laid bare to its base,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 at your rebuke, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the blast of the breath of your nostrils.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He stretched from on high, he seized me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 drew me up from the mighty waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and saved me from those who hated me \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 fierce foes, too mighty for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}In my day of distress they assailed me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} proved my support.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}To a spacious place he brought me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and, for love of me, he saved me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} repays my innocence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he rewards my cleanness of hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For I kept the ways of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor have wickedly strayed from my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}His commandments were all before me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his statutes I put not away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And I was blameless before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 guarding myself from sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So the {\scaps Lord} repaid my innocence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my cleanness of hands in his sight.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}With the loyal you are loyal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with the blameless blameless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}With the pure you show yourself pure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but shrewd with the devious.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For the lowly people you save,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but haughty eyes you abase.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You are my lamp, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God who enlightens my darkness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}With you I can storm a rampart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with my God I can leap a wall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}As for God, his way is perfect;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the word of the {\scaps Lord} is pure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He is shield to all who take refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}For who is God but the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And who is a rock but our God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The God who arms me with strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who cleared and smoothed my way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He made my feet like hinds\uc1\u8217* feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and set me up on the heights.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}He taught my hands how to fight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my arms how to bend a bronze bow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The shield of your help you gave me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your right hand supports me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you stoop down to make me great.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}In your strength I took giant strides,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my feet never slipped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}So I chased the foe till I caught them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and turned not, till I made an end of them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I smashed them, they could not rise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they fell beneath my feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}You did arm me with strength for war,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did bow my assailants beneath me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}You made my foes turn their back to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who did hate me I finished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}They cried for help, but none saved them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the {\scaps Lord}, but he answered them not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}I beat them like dust of the market-place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 stamped them like mud of the streets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}From the strife of the peoples you saved me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you made me head of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 peoples I knew not did serve me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}On the instant they hear, they obey me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 foreigners come to me cringing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Foreigners lose courage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and come out of their strongholds trembling.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}The {\scaps Lord} is alive! Blest be my rock!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Exalted be God, my protector!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The God who gave me revenge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and brought down nations beneath me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}who saved me from angry foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and set me above my assailants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 safe from the violent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}For this I will praise you among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 making music, O {\scaps Lord}, to your name:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}for great triumphs he grants to his king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and faithful love he shows his anointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to David and his seed evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 19 \uc1\u8211* The Glory of God in the Heavens

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 19} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The heavens declare God\uc1\u8217*s glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sky tells what his hands have done.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Day tells it to day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 night reveals it to night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}without speaking, without words;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 without the sound of voices.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But through all the world their voice carries
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their words to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He has pitched a tent for the sun in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}it comes out like a bridegroom from his bridal chamber,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it joyfully runs its course like a hero.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}From one end of the heavens it rises,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and round it runs to the other,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and nothing hides from its heat.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 In Praise of the Law

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The law of the {\scaps Lord} is perfect,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 renewing life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The decrees of the {\scaps Lord} are trusty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 making the simple wise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The behests of the {\scaps Lord} are right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 rejoicing the heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The command of the {\scaps Lord} is pure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 giving light to the eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The fear of the {\scaps Lord} is clean,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s judgments are true
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and right altogether.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}More precious are they than gold \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than fine gold in plenty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and sweeter they are than honey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that drops from the comb.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}By them is your servant warned;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who keeps them has rich reward.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Who can know their flaws?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Absolve me from those I know not.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Keep your servant from wilful sins \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from falling under their sway:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then blameless and clear will I be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from great offence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be pleasing to you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my rock and redeemer.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 20 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Victory

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 20} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} answer you in the day of distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the name of the Jacob\uc1\u8217*s God protect you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}sending you help from the temple,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 out of Zion supporting you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}All your meal-offerings may he remember,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your burnt-offerings look on with favour. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}May he grant you your heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and bring all your plans to pass.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}We will shout then for joy at your victory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rejoice in the name of our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 May the {\scaps Lord} grant your every request.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now I am sure that the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will help his anointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From his temple in heaven he will answer
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by his mighty triumphant right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Some in chariots are strong, some in horses;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but our strength is the {\scaps Lord} our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They will totter and fall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while we rise and stand firm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Give victory, {\scaps Lord}, to the king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and answer us when we call.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 21 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer after a Victory

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 21} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The king rejoices, {\scaps Lord}, in your might,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 how he exults because of your help!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You have granted to him his heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have not withheld his lips\uc1\u8217* request. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You came to meet him with rich blessings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you set on his head a golden crown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He asked you for life, you gave it \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 many long days, forever and ever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Great is his glory because of your help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 honour and majesty you lay upon him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For you make him most blessed forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you make him glad with the joy of your presence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the king puts always his trust in the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the Most High, in his love, will preserve him unshaken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Your hand will reach all your foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your right hand, all who hate you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You will make them like a furnace of fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when you appear, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} will swallow them up in his wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The fire will devour them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You will sweep their offspring from the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their children from humanity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When they scheme against you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and hatch evil plots \uc1\u8211* they will fail.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For you aim your bow at their faces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make them turn in flight.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Be exalted, {\scaps Lord}, in your strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to your might we shall sing and make music.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 22 \uc1\u8211* The Sufferer\uc1\u8217*s Triumph

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 22} For the leader; set to \uc1\u8220*Deer of the Dawn\uc1\u8221*. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My God, my God, why have you left me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my rescue so far from the words of my roaring?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I cry in the day, you do not answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I cry in the night but find no rest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You are the Holy One,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 throned on the praises of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In you our ancestors trusted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they trusted and you delivered them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They cried to you, and found safety,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in you did they trust and were not put to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But I am a worm, not a person;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 insulted by others, despised by the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All who see me mock me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with mouths wide open and wagging heads:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*He relies on the {\scaps Lord}; let him save him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let him rescue the one he holds dear!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But you drew me from the womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 laid me safely on my mother\uc1\u8217*s breasts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On your care was I cast from my very birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you are my God from my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Be not far from me, for trouble is nigh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and there is none to help.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I am circled by many bulls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 beset by the mighty of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}who face me with gaping jaws,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like ravening roaring lions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Poured out am I like water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all my bones are loosened.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My heart is become like wax,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 melted within me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}My palate is dry as a sherd,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my tongue sticks to my jaws;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the dust of death you lay me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For dogs are round about me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a band of knaves encircles me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 gnawing my hands and my feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I can count my bones, every one.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 As for them, they feast their eyes on me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They divide my garments among them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and over my raiment cast lots.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But you, O {\scaps Lord}, be not far,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O my strength, hasten to help me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Deliver my life from the sword
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my life from the power of the dogs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Save me from the jaws of the lion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the horns of the wild oxen help me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I will tell of your fame to my kindred,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in the assembly will praise you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, you who fear him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All Jacob\uc1\u8217*s seed, give him glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All Israel\uc1\u8217*s seed, stand in awe of him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For he has not despised nor abhorred
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sorrow of the sorrowful.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He hid not his face from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but he listened to my cry for help.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Of you is my praise in the great congregation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my vows I will pay before those who fear him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The afflicted will eat to their heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who seek after the {\scaps Lord} will praise him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lift up your hearts forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}All will call it to mind, to the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and turn to the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all tribes of the nations will bow down before you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For the kingdom belongs to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is the {\scaps Lord} of the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}To him will bow down all who sleep in the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and before him bend all who go down to the dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who could not preserve their lives.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}My descendants will tell of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the next generation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}they will declare his righteousness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to people yet to be born:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He has done it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 23 \uc1\u8211* The Good Shepherd

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 23} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} is my shepherd: I am never in need.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He lays me down in green pastures.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He gently leads me to waters of rest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}he refreshes my life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He guides me along paths that are straight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 true to his name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And when my way lies through a valley of gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I fear no evil, for you are with me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your rod and your staff comfort me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You spread a table for me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in face of my foes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with oil you anoint my head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my cup runs over.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Surely goodness and love will pursue me \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the days of my life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the house of the {\scaps Lord} I will live
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 through the length of the days.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 24 \uc1\u8211* The True Worshipper

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 24} Of David. A psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The earth is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s and all that it holds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the world and those who live in it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For he founded it on the seas,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and on the floods he sustains it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Who may ascend the hill of the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who may stand in his holy place?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The clean of hands, the pure of heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who sets not their heart upon sinful things,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor swears with intent to deceive:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}they win from the {\scaps Lord} a blessing:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God is their champion and saviour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Such must be those who resort to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and seek the face of the God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lords\uc1\u8217*s Triumphal Entry into the Sanctuary

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Lift high your heads, you gates \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Higher, you ancient doors;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 welcome the glorious king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Who is the glorious king?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} strong and heroic,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} heroic in battle.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Lift high your heads, you gates \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Higher, you ancient doors;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 welcome the glorious king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Who is the glorious king?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is the glorious king.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 25 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Forgiveness and Protection

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 25} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
To you, O {\scaps Lord}, I lift up my heart:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the day I wait for you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In you I trust, put me not to shame;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let not my foes exult over me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}None will be shamed who wait for you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but shame will fall upon wanton traitors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Make me, O {\scaps Lord}, to know your ways:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 teach me your paths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In your faithfulness guide me and teach me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you are my God and my saviour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Remember your pity, O {\scaps Lord}, and your kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they have been ever of old.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Do not remember the sins of my youth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 remember me in kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of your goodness, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Good is the {\scaps Lord} and upright,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so he teaches sinners the way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The humble he guides in the right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he teaches the humble his way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}All his ways are loving and loyal
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to those who observe his charges and covenant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Be true to your name {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 forgive my many sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Who then is the person who fears the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He will teach them the way to choose.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They will live in prosperity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their children will inherit the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} gives guidance to those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with his covenant he makes them acquainted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}My eyes are ever toward the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for out of the net he brings my foot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Turn to me with your favour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I am lonely and crushed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In my heart are strain and storm;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bring me out of my distresses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Look on my misery and trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and pardon all my sins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}look on my foes oh, so many!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And their cruel hatred towards me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Deliver me, keep me, and shame not
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 one who takes refuge in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}May integrity and innocence preserve me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I wait for you, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Redeem Israel, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from all its distresses.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 26 \uc1\u8211* Prayer of a Devout Worshipper

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 26} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Defend me, O {\scaps Lord}, for my walk has been blameless;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the {\scaps Lord} have I trusted unswervingly:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Examine me, {\scaps Lord}, and test me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 test my heart and my mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For your love is before my eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your faithfulness governs my way.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I never sat down with the worthless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor companied with dissemblers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I hate the assembly of knaves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would never sit down with the wicked;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but, with hands washed in innocence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would march round your altar, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}singing loud songs of thanks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and telling of all your wonders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O {\scaps Lord}, I love your house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the place where your glory lives.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Do not gather me up with sinners;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 slay me not with people of blood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}whose hands are stained with villainy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and whose right hand is filled with bribes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But my walk is blameless!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O redeem me, be gracious to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}My foot stands on even ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the choirs I will bless the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 27 \uc1\u8211* If God is for Me

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 27} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} is my light and my saviour;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whom then should I fear?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} protects my life;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whom then should I dread?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the wicked drew near to assail me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and eat up my flesh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it was those who distressed and opposed me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who stumbled and fell.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Though against me a host should encamp,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet my heart would be fearless:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 though battle should rise up against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 still would I be trustful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}One thing have I asked of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and that do I long for \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 To live in the house of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the days of my life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to gaze on the grace of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and inquire in his temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For he will hide me in his shelter
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of misfortune.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In his sheltering tent he hides me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he lifts me up on a rock.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And now that my head he has lifted
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 above my encircling foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will march round the altar and sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shouting with joy, in his tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 making music and song to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Serenity of Faith

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Hear, O {\scaps Lord}, my loud cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and graciously answer me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}My heart has said to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Your face, O {\scaps Lord}, I seek.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Hide not your face from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 reject not your servant in anger:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you have been my help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Abandon me not, nor forsake me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O God of my help:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for father and mother have left me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} will take me up.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Teach me your way, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lead me in an even path,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of my enemies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Give me not up, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 unto the rage of my foes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for against me have risen false witnesses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 breathing out cruelty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Firm is the faith I cherish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I, in the land of the living,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will yet see the goodness of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Let your heart be courageous and strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and wait on the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 28 \uc1\u8211* An Answered Prayer for Help

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 28} Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Unto you, O {\scaps Lord}, do I cry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my rock, be not deaf to me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 lest, through holding your peace, I become
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like those who go down to the pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hear my loud entreaty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as I cry for help to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 lifting my hands, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 towards your holy chancel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Take me not off with the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor with the workers of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose speech to their neighbours is friendly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while evil is in their heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Give them as they have done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as their wicked deeds deserve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As their hands have wrought, so give to them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 requite to them their deserts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They are blind to all that the {\scaps Lord} does,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to all that his hands have wrought;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and so he will tear them down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to build them up no more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Blest be the {\scaps Lord}, who has heard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my voice as I plead for mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} is my strength and my shield;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heart trusts in him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I was helped: so my heart is exultant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in my song I will praise him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} is the strength of his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the fortress who saves his anointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}O save your people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and bless your inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Be their shepherd
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and carry them forever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 29 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Glory in the Storm

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 29} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord}, you heavenly beings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} glory and power
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} the glory he manifests:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bow to the {\scaps Lord} in holy array.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice peals on the waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The God of glory has thundered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He peals o\uc1\u8217*er the mighty waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice sounds with strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice sounds with majesty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice breaks the cedars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he breaks the cedars of Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}making Lebanon dance like a calf,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Sirion like a young wild ox.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice hews out flames of fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice rends the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he rends the desert of Kadesh.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s voice whirls the oaks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and strips the forests bare;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all in his temple say \uc1\u8216*Glory.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} was king at the flood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} sits throned forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} gives strength to his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he blesses his people with peace.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 30 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Thanksgiving for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 30} A psalm of David. A song for the dedication of the Temple.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will extol you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you have lifted me up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and not suffered my foes to rejoice over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I cried to you for help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} my God, and you healed me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You have brought me up, {\scaps Lord}, from Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from my way to the pit back to life you have called me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Sing praise to the {\scaps Lord}, faithful people;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 give thanks to his holy name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For his anger lasts only a moment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his favour endures for a lifetime.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Weeping may lodge for the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the morning brings shouts of joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When all went well, I imagined
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that never should I be shaken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For by your favour, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you had set me on mountains strong:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but you hide your face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I was confounded.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then to you, {\scaps Lord}, I cried,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the {\scaps Lord} I begged for mercy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*What profit is there in my blood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 if I go down to the pit?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Can you be praised by dust?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Can it tell of your faithfulness?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Hear, {\scaps Lord}, and show me your favour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 {\scaps Lord} be a helper to me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You have turned my mourning to dancing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my sackcloth you have unloosed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and clothed me with joy:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}that unceasingly I should sing your praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and give thanks to you, {\scaps Lord} my God, forever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 31 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Troubles

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 31} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In you, O {\scaps Lord}, I take refuge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let me never be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Rescue me in your faithfulness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}incline to me your ear.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Deliver me speedily.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be to me a rock of defence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a fortified house, to save me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For my rock and my fortress are you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 lead me and guide me so your name will be honoured.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Draw me out of the net they have hid for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you yourself are my refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Into your hand I commend my spirit:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you ransom me, {\scaps Lord}, faithful God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I hate those devoted to worthless idols;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I trust in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will rejoice and be glad in your love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you have looked on my misery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and cared for me in my distress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You have not given me into the enemy\uc1\u8217*s hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have set my feet in a spacious place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Be gracious to me, {\scaps Lord}, for I am distressed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my eye is wasted away with sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For my life is consumed with grief,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my years with sighing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My strength is broken with misery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my bones waste away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The scorn of all my foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the butt of my neighbours am I,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a terror to my acquaintance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 At the sight of me in the street
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 people turn quickly away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I am clean forgotten like the dead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 am become like a ruined vessel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I hear the whispers of many \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 terror on every side \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 scheming together against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 plotting to take my life.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But my trust is in you, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*You are my God,\uc1\u8217* I say;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}my times are in your hand, save me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the hand of the foes who pursue me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Make your face to shine on your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 save me in your love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Put me not, O {\scaps Lord}, to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I have called upon you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let the wicked be put to shame
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 silent in Sheol.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Strike the false lips dumb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that speak proudly against the righteous
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with haughtiness and contempt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}How great is the goodness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have treasured for those who fear you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and wrought for those who take refuge in you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in plain sight of all!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In your sheltering wings you hide them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from plottings of people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you keep them safe in a bower
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the chiding of tongues.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Blest be the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the wonderful love he has shown me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in time of distress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For I had said in panic,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I am driven clean out of your sight.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But you heard my plea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I cried to you for help.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Love the {\scaps Lord}, all you faithful;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} protects the loyal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but repays the haughty in full.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Let your hearts be courageous and strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all you who wait on the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 32 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer of Confession and Joy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 32} Of David. A maskil.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Happy those whose transgression is pardoned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose sin is covered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Happy are those, free from falseness of spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to whom the {\scaps Lord} reckons no debt of guilt.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When I held my peace, my bones wore away
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with my endless groaning;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for day and night did your hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lie heavy upon me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The sap of my life was dried up
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as with fierce summer-heat. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I began to acknowledge my sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not concealing my guilt;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the moment I vowed to confess
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the {\scaps Lord} my transgression,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then you yourself did pardon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the guilt of my sin. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For this cause let all who are faithful
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pray to you in the time of distress;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then, when the great waters rush,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they will not reach to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For you are my shelter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you protect me from trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and surround me with deliverance. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*With my eye steadfastly upon you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will instruct and teach you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The way you should go.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Do not be like the horse or the mule,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that have no understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but need bridle and halter to curb them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 else they will not come near to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The godless have many sorrows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but those who trust in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will be compassed about by his kindness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Be glad in the {\scaps Lord}, and rejoice, you righteous;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and ring out your joy, all you upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 33 \uc1\u8211* A Hymn of Thanksgiving

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 33}Shout for joy in the {\scaps Lord}, you righteous:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise for the upright is seemly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} on the lyre,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 play to him on a ten-stringed harp.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Sing to him a new song,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 play skilfully and shout merrily.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For the {\scaps Lord} is straight in his promise;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all that he does is in faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Justice and right he loves;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the earth is full of his kindness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}By his word the heavens were made,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all their host by the breath of his mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He gathers the sea in a bottle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the ocean he puts into store-houses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let the whole world honour the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let all who live on earth be in awe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For at his word it came into being,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at his command it stood forth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} frustrates the designs of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 what the peoples have purposed, he brings to nought,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}but the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own design will stand forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and what his heart has purposed, through all generations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Happy the nation whose God is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the people he chose for himself as his own.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} looks down from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he sees all of humanity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}from where he rules he gazes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on all who inhabit the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He fashions the hearts of them all,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and gives heed to all that they do.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}It is not by great armies that kings are victorious,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it is not by great strength that a warrior saves himself;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}false hope is the war-horse to usher in victory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all its great might it can provide no escape.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}See! The eye of the {\scaps Lord} is on those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on those who hope in his kindness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}to deliver their life from death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to keep them alive in famine.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}We wait for the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is our help and our shield.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For in him our heart is glad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 we trust in his holy name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Let your kindness, O {\scaps Lord}, be upon us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as is our hope in you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 34 \uc1\u8211* The Lord is Mindful of His Own

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 34} Of David, when he feigned madness in the presence of Abimelech, who drove him away, and he left.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will bless the {\scaps Lord} at all times,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in my mouth will his praise be forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In the {\scaps Lord} will my heart make her boast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the humble will hear and be glad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}O magnify the {\scaps Lord} with me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and let us extol his name together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I sought the {\scaps Lord}, and, in answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he saved me from all my terrors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Look to him and you will be radiant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with faces unashamed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Here is one who was crushed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but cried and was heard by the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and brought safe out of every trouble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s angel encamps
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 about those who fear him, and rescues them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O taste and see that the {\scaps Lord} is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 happy those who take refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Fear the {\scaps Lord}, all his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they who fear him lack nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Even young lions may be poor and hungry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but those who seek the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will not lack any good thing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Come, children, listen to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will teach you the fear of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Which of you is desirous of life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 loves many and happy days?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then guard your tongue from evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your lips from speaking deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Depart from evil, and do good;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 seek peace, and pursue it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The eyes of the {\scaps Lord} are towards the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his ears are towards their cry for help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The {\scaps Lord} sets his face against those who do evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to root their memory out of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When righteous cry, they are heard by the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he saves them from all their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The {\scaps Lord} is near to the broken-hearted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he helps those whose spirit is crushed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Many misfortunes befall the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} delivers them out of them all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He guards all their bones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 none are broken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Misfortune will slay the ungodly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those who hate the righteous are doomed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The {\scaps Lord} ransoms the life of his servants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and none will be doomed who takes refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 35 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Malicious Foes

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 35} Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Contend, {\scaps Lord}, with those who contend with me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 do battle with those who do battle with me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Grasp shield and buckler,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rise up as my help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Draw spear and battle-axe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 confront those who pursue me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Assure me that you will help me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Dishonour and shame be on those
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who are seeking my life!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Defeat and confusion on those
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who are planning my hurt!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As chaff before wind may they be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s angel pursuing them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Slippery and dark be their way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with his angel thrusting them on.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For they wantonly hid their net for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and dug a pit to destroy me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Upon them may ruin come unawares;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may the net which they hid catch themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and into the pit may they fall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then I will exult in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and be joyful because of his help;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and all my being will say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Who, O {\scaps Lord}, is like you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who save the helpless from those too strong for them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the poor and the helpless from those who despoil them?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Violent witnesses rise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and ask of me things that I know not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Evil for good they requite me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 leaving me inwardly comfortless.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But when {\i they} were sick, {\i I} put on sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and chastened myself with fasting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I prayed with head bowed low,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}as if for my friend or my brother.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I went about bowed and in mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as one who laments his mother.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When I stumbled, they gleefully gathered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 strangers gathered around me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and tore at me without ceasing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}impiously mocking and mocking,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bearing their teeth at me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}How long, {\scaps Lord}, will you look on?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Rescue me from their roaring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my precious life from the lions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will then give you thanks in the great congregation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and praise you before many people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Suffer not those to rejoice over me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who are falsely my foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 suffer not those who without cause abhor me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to wink with the eye.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For it is not peace that they speak
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of those who are quiet in the land;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but treacherous charges they plot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}With wide open mouths they shout,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Hurrah! Hurrah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With our own eyes we saw it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But you have seen, too, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 keep not silence, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be not far from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Bestir you, awake, for my right
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God, my {\scaps Lord}, for my cause.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}You are just, {\scaps Lord}: win for me justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let them not rejoice over me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}inwardly saying, \uc1\u8216*Hurrah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The desire of our hearts at last!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Now we have swallowed him up.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Shame and confusion together
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on those who rejoice at my hurt!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Clothed with shame and dishonour
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be those who are haughty to me!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Let such as delight in my cause
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 ring out their gladness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and say evermore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Great is the {\scaps Lord} whose delight
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is the well-being of his servant.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then my tongue will tell of your justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all the day long of your praise.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 36 \uc1\u8211* The Triumphant Power of God\uc1\u8217*s Love

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 36} For the leader. Of the servant of the {\scaps Lord}, of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Sin whispers within the heart of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who have no dread of God before their eyes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It flatters them in their eyes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that their sin will not be found out.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}First, their speech becomes wicked and false,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they give up acting wisely and well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then they plot deliberate wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 take their stand on the wicked way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 without the least shrinking from evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Your love, O {\scaps Lord}, touches the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your faithfulness reaches the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Your justice is like the great mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your judgments are like the broad sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 {\scaps Lord}, you save people and animals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}How precious your love, O God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All may seek shelter in the shadow of your wings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They feast on the fat of your house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they drink of your brook of delights.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For with you is the fountain of life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the light that is yours we see light.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}O continue your grace to the faithful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your love to the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let no arrogant foot tread upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no wicked hand drive me to exile.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}There the workers of wrong lie prostrate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 thrust down to rise up no more.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 37 \uc1\u8211* Trust in the Lord and Do Good

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 37} Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Be not kindled to wrath at the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor envious of those who work wrong;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for, like grass, they will speedily wither,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fade like the green of young grass.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Trust in the {\scaps Lord}, and do good;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 remain in the land, and deal faithfully:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}then the {\scaps Lord} will be your delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will grant you your heart\uc1\u8217*s petitions.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Commit your way to the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 trust in him, and he will act,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}making clear as the light your right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your just cause clear as the noon-day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In silence and patience wait on the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Be not kindled to anger at those who prosper.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At those who execute evil devices.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Desist from anger, abandon wrath:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be not kindled to anger it leads but to evil:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}for evildoers will be cut off,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the land will be theirs, who wait on the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Yet but a little, and the wicked vanish:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 look at their place: they are there no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the humble will have the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the rapture of peace in abundance.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The wicked plots against the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
  snarls like a wild animal;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}the {\scaps Lord} laughs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he sees that his day is coming.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The wicked have drawn the sword, and bent the bow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to fell the poor, to slay those who walk uprightly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but their sword will pierce their own heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their bows will be broken in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Better is the righteous person\uc1\u8217*s little
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than the wealth of many wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For the arms of the wicked will be broken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} upholds the righteous.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The {\scaps Lord} watches over the days of the blameless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their heritage will continue forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They will not be shamed in the evil time,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the days of famine they will be satisfied.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Because the wicked will perish:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but the foes of the {\scaps Lord}, like a brand in the oven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will vanish, like smoke they will vanish.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The wicked must borrow and cannot pay back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the righteous is lavish and gives.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For those blest by the {\scaps Lord} inherit the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while those whom he curses will be cut off.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The {\scaps Lord} supports the steps
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of those with whom he is pleased.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Though they fall, they will not be cast headlong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the {\scaps Lord} holds their hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Never, from youth to age,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 have I seen the righteous forsaken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or their children begging bread.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They are ever lavishly lending,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their children are fountains of blessing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Turn away from evil and do good
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you will live in the land forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For the {\scaps Lord} loves justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he does not forsake his friends.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The unrighteous will be destroyed forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the seed of the wicked will be cut off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}But the land will belong to the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they will live upon it forever,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The mouth of the righteous murmurs wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and words of justice are on their tongues.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The law of their God is in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their steps are never unsteady.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The wicked watches the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and seeks to put them to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But the {\scaps Lord} leaves them not in their hand:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at their trial they will not be held guilty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Wait on the {\scaps Lord}, and observe his way:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will lift you to honour the land will be yours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will feast your eyes on the doom of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}I have seen the wicked exultant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lifting themselves like a cedar of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But the moment I passed, they vanished!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I sought for them, but they could not be found.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Preserve your honour and practise uprightness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for such a person fares well in the end.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But transgressors will perish together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Cut off are the wicked forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The righteous are saved by the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who in time of distress is their refuge:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}the {\scaps Lord} helps and rescue them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the wicked he rescues and saves them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because they take refuge in him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 38 \uc1\u8211* A Confession and Prayer for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 38} A Psalm of David. A lament.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Reprove me not, {\scaps Lord}, in your anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and chasten me not in your wrath;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for your arrows have sunk into me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your hand lies heavy upon me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In my flesh is no soundness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of your anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no health in my bones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of my sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For that my guilt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is gone over my head:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it weighs like a burden
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 too heavy for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My wounds stink and fester,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for my foolishness I am tormented.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Bent and bowed am I utterly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the day going in mourning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}My loins are filled with burning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in my flesh is no soundness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I am utterly crushed and numb;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I cry louder than lion roars.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Lord}, you know all that I long for,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my groans are not hidden from you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}My heart is throbbing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my strength has failed me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The light of my eyes \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 even it is gone from me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}My dear ones and friends keep aloof,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my neighbours stand afar off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They who aim at my life lay their snares,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they who seek my hurt speak of ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nursing treachery all the day long.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I turn a deaf ear and hear not;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the dumb I open not my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am like one without hearing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with no arguments in my mouth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For my hope, O {\scaps Lord}, is in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You will answer, O {\scaps Lord} my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}when I utter the hope that those
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who made scorn of my tottering feet
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may not rejoice over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For I am ready to fall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my pain forsakes me never.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I acknowledge my guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I am anxious because of my sin:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}My wanton assailants are strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those who wrongfully hate me are many,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}who render me evil for good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and oppose me, because I make good my goal.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Do not forsake me, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God, be not far from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Hasten to help me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} my saviour.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 39 \uc1\u8211* The Pathos of Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 39} For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I vowed to watch my words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and sin not with my tongue,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but to put on my mouth a muzzle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while the wicked were in my presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I was silent and dumb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 speechless:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but my pain was stirred up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}My heart grew hot within me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as I mused, the fire was kindled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till at last the words came to my tongue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Teach me, O {\scaps Lord}, my end,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the sum of my days what it is.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let me know how transient I am.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}See! My days you have made but a span,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my life is as nothing before you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is but as a breath that everyone stands: {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}it is but in mere semblance we walk to and fro,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all our noise is for nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 We heap up, and know not who will gather.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And now, what wait I for, {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 My hope is in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}From all my transgressions deliver me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make me not the scorn of the fool.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I am dumb, never opening my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for this is your own doing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Remove your stroke from off me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by the might of your hand I am spent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When you rebuke someone to punish their sins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you consume, like a moth, what they treasures.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Everyone is only a breath. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Hear my prayer, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend to my cry for help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Hold not your peace at my tears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I am but a guest of yours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a stranger visiting, like all my ancestors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Look away from me, let me smile again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before I die and am gone.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 40 \uc1\u8211* Thanksgiving and Petition

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 40} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
For the {\scaps Lord} I waited and waited,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till, inclining to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he heard my cry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}From the horrible pit he drew me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 up out of the miry clay;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he set my feet on a rock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my steps he made firm.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He put a new song in my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of praise to our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Many see it, and, filled with awe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 put their trust in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Happy the person who has put
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the {\scaps Lord} their trust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not looking to false gods
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or turning to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}With us you have wrought in rich measure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your marvels and purposes for us \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 none may compare with you \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 were I to declare or to tell them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 past counting are they.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In offerings bloody or bloodless
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have no delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but with open ears you have made me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Burnt-offering and offering for sin
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are not what you ask.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then said I, \uc1\u8216*Here I am,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as the roll of the book has enjoined.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}My delight, O God, is to do your will,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your law is within my heart.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Well, O {\scaps Lord}, you know
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that, with lips unrestrained,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your righteousness I told
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the great congregation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}not hiding it in my heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have told of your steadfast help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the great congregation I hid not
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your love and your faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So do not restrain, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your pity from us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your love and your faithfulness \uc1\u8211* ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may they be our shield.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For evils that cannot be numbered
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 have compassed me round.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My transgressions have followed me up \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I can bear it no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They are more than the hairs of my head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my heart has forsaken me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}O {\scaps Lord}, be pleased to deliver me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 haste to my help, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May those who are seeking my life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be ashamed and confounded together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may those who delight in my hurt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be defeated and brought to dishonour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}May those who hurrah over me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be dumbfounded because of their shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But may all who seek after you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 rejoice and be glad in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 May all those eager for your aid,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 say, \uc1\u8216*Great is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217* evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I am weak and needy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet the {\scaps Lord} cares for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You are my help and deliverer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 don\uc1\u8217*t delay, my God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 41 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Healing and Vindication

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 41} For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Happy are those who consider the weak;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of misfortune the {\scaps Lord} will deliver them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He will keep them safe, happy, and long in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and not give them up to the rage of their foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} will sustain them on bed of languishing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tending their sickness, as long as they lie.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For this cause I say, \uc1\u8216*{\scaps Lord}, show me your favour;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 heal me, because I have sinned against you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My enemies speak of me nothing but evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*When will he die, and his name pass away?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When one comes to see me, their words ring hollow;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their heart keeps gathering mischief the while;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and when they go out, they give it speech.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In secret they whisper together against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all those who hate me plot evil against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Some fatal disease has fastened upon him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and now that he lies, he will rise up no more.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}My most trusted friend, on whom I relied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who ate of my bread, has turned against me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But do you, {\scaps Lord}, graciously raise me up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may pay them their due reward.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}By this will I know you delight in me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 if my foes may not shout over me in triumph.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For my innocence you uphold me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and set me forever before your face.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\i {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, the God of Israel,}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i from everlasting to everlasting,}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i Amen and Amen.}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 Book Two

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 42 \uc1\u8211* Yearning for God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 42} For the leader. A maskil of the Korahites.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Like the hart which longs
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for brooks of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I long
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you, God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I thirst for God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for my living God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When shall I enter in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and see the face of God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}My tears have been my food
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by day and by night;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for they say to me all the day long,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Where is your God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My heart floods with sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as I call to mind:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 how I used to pass on with the throng,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at their head, to the house of God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with glad shouts and giving of thanks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the throng who kept festival.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why am I downcast?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why this moaning within me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hope in God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for yet will I praise him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my help, my God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I am sunk in my misery;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will therefore call you to mind
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the land of Jordan and Hermon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the mountain Mizar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Flood is calling to flood
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the noise of your cataracts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all your waves and your breakers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 have passed over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the day I cry to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to summon his kindness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the song that I sing in the night
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is a prayer to the living God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I say to God my rock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Why have you forgotten me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why must I walk so sadly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so hard pressed by the foe?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It pierces me to the heart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to hear the enemy\uc1\u8217*s taunts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as all the day long they say to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Where is your God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Why am I downcast?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why this moaning within me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hope in God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for yet will I praise him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my help, my God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 43 \uc1\u8211* Plea for Help

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 43}Right me, defend my cause
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 against a pitiless people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the crafty and crooked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O God, deliver me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For you are God my protector:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 why have you cast me off?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why must I walk so sadly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so hard pressed by the foe?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Send forth your light and your truth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let them be my guides:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to your holy hill let them bring me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the place where you live.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then will I go to God\uc1\u8217*s altar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to God my rejoicing;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and with joy on the lyre I will praise you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O God, my God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why am I downcast?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why this moaning within me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hope in God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for yet will I praise him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my help, my God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 44 \uc1\u8211* A Lament in Defeat

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 44} For the leader. Of the Korahites. A maskil.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O God, we have heard with our ears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all our ancestors have told us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of the work that you wrought in their day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your wonders in days of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}uprooting and crushing the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 then planting and settling them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For it wasn\uc1\u8217*t their own sword that won them the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}it was not their own arm that brought them the victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yours was the hand and the arm,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yours was the face that shone on them with favour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}It was you, my king and my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that ordained the victories of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Through you we can thrust back our foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and by your name tread down our assailants:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for not in my bow do I trust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor can my sword win me the victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Our victory comes from you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and confusion to those who hate us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In God we boast all the day long,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your name will we praise forever. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Yet you have spurned and disgraced us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in not going forth with our armies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and in making us flee from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that those who hated us plundered us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You have let us be eaten like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have scattered us over the world,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}sold your people for a pittance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and getting no gain from their price.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You have made us the butt of our neighbours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the derision and scorn of all round us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}O\uc1\u8217*er the world you have made us a byword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the nations at us shake their heads.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}My disgrace is forever before me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my face is covered with shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}at the words of blasphemer and scoffer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the sight of the foe and the vengeful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}All this has come upon us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet we have not forgotten you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor falsely dealt with your covenant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Our heart has not turned back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor our steps declined from your way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}that you thus should have crushed us down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and covered us over with gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the place where the jackals roam.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Had we forgotten the name of our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or stretched out our hands to a god that was strange,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}would God not have searched this out?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For he knows the heart and its secrets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But in your cause it is we are killed all the day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and counted as sheep for the slaughter.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Rouse yourself, why do you sleep Lord?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Awake, cast us not off forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Why do you hide your face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 forgetting our stress and our misery?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For we have sunk down to the dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our bodies cling to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Arise, come to our help:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for your love\uc1\u8217*s sake, ransom us.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 45 \uc1\u8211* Song for the Marriage of a King

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 45} For the leader; on shoshannim. Of the Korahites. A maskil. A love song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My heart is astir with beautiful words:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will sing a song, concerning the king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with tongue like the pen of a ready writer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Your beauty is more than mortal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 grace is shed over your lips:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 therefore God has blessed you forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Warrior, strap your sword on your thigh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What glory and splendour!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Good fortune attend you, as forth you ride
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the cause of good faith, and as champion of justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 May your arm instruct you in deeds of dread.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Sharp are your arrows; nations fall under you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pierced to the heart are the foes of the king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Your throne shall endure for ever and ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your royal sceptre a sceptre of equity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Right you love and wrong you hate:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 therefore the {\scaps Lord} your God anoints you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With oil of gladness above your fellows.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}With myrrh, aloes, and cassia your robes are all fragrant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you are gladdened by music of ivory harps.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}King\uc1\u8217*s daughters stand ready with jewels for you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at your right hand the queen in gold of Ophir.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Listen, daughter, and see; and incline your ear:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 forget your folk and your father\uc1\u8217*s house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And when the king desires your beauty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bow to him, for he is your lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So shall the Tyrians come with gifts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the richest of people will do you homage.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The king\uc1\u8217*s daughter is glorious altogether,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with dress of pearls inwrought with gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In many-coloured robes she is led to the king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the virgin companions she brought in her train.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The king\uc1\u8217*s palace they enter with joy and rejoicing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}May sons of yours take the place of your fathers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whom you will make princes in all the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Your name will I celebrate world without end,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that nations shall praise you for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 46 \uc1\u8211* Our God is a Mighty Fortress

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 46} For the leader. Of the Korahites, on alamoth. A song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God is our refuge and strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a very present help in trouble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So we have no fear, though earth should change,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the hills totter into the heart of the ocean.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let its waters roar and foam,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On our side is the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our sure defence is the God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A river there is, whose streams make glad
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God\uc1\u8217*s city, the home the Most High has hallowed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God is within her: she cannot be shaken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God helps her at the turn of the morning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Nations roared, kingdoms tottered:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he uttered his voice, earth melted away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On our side is the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our sure defence is the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Come and see what the {\scaps Lord} has done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 working appallingly in the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He stills wars to the ends of the earth \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 breaking the bow, snapping the spear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 burning the chariots in the fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Refrain; and know surely that I am God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 high over the nations, high over the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On our side is the {\scaps Lord} of Hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our sure defence is the God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 47 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Universal Sovereignty

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 47} For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Clap your hands, all you peoples:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shout to God in ringing cries.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For the {\scaps Lord} is most high and dread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a great king over all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He subdues the peoples under us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the nations under our feet;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}he chooses our heritage for us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the glory of Jacob whom he loves. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God is gone up with a shout,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} with the sound of a trumpet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Sing praise to our God, sing praises:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sing praise to our king, sing praises.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For king of all earth is he:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise God in a skilful song.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}God is king over all the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God sits on his holy throne.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Princes of nations gather
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the people of Abraham\uc1\u8217*s God:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the shields of the earth are God\uc1\u8217*s;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 greatly exalted is he.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 48 \uc1\u8211* The Marvellous Deliverance of Zion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 48} A song. A psalm of the Korahites.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Great is the {\scaps Lord} and worthy all praise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the city of our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His holy mountain,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}that rises so fair,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is the joy of all the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like the mount of the gods is Mount Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the city of the great king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Once God made himself known
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as the defence of her palaces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For see! A concert of kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 passed over the frontier together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But one glance, and they were astounded;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they hastened away in dismay.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Trembling took hold of them there,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the pains of a woman in labour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They were shattered, as east wind shatters
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the giant ships in pieces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}What we heard, we now have seen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the city of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the city of our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God will uphold her forever. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We think, O God, of your love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the midst of your temple.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Your fame, O God, like your name, shall extend
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Victory fills your hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let mount Zion be glad;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let the daughters of Judah rejoice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of your judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Walk about Zion, go round her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 count her towers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Set your mind on her ramparts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 consider her palaces;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that you tell to the next generation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}That such is God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 our God he it is who shall guide us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 49 \uc1\u8211* The Problem of the Prosperity of the Wicked

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 49} For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Hear this, you peoples all;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend, all you who live in the world
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}people of low degree and high,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the rich and the poor together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}My mouth shall utter wisdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the thoughts of a seeing heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I incline my ear to a proverb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the lyre I will open my riddle.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why should I be afraid in the days of misfortune,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when circled by wicked and cunning foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}who put their trust in their wealth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and boast of their boundless riches?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For assuredly no one can ransom themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or give to God the price of their life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for the ransom of a life is costly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no payment is ever enough,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}to keep them alive for ever and ever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so as never to see the pit at all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But see it they will. Even wise people die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the fool and the brutish perish alike,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and abandon their wealth to others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The grave is their everlasting home,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the place they shall live in for ever and ever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 though after their own names they called whole lands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Despite their wealth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they perish like dumb animals.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}This is the fate of the confident fool,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the end of those who are pleased with their portion. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Like sheep they descend to Sheol
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with Death for their shepherd;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 down they go straight to the grave,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their form wastes away in their home below.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But God will assuredly ransom my life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the hand of Sheol;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he will receive me. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So be not afraid when someone grows rich,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when the wealth of their house increases.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Not a shred of it all can they take when they die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wealth cannot follow them down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Though they count themselves happy, when they are alive,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and win praise from many for faring so well,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}they must join their ancestors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who see the light nevermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The wealthy are without understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they perish like dumb animals.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 50 \uc1\u8211* True Worship

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 50} A psalm of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
The {\scaps Lord} God has spoken: He summons the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from sunrise to sunset.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}From Zion, perfection of beauty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God\uc1\u8217*s glory shines forth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Our God comes, he cannot keep silence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 devouring fire is before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and furious tempest around him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He summons the heavens above
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the earth to judge his people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Gather to him his saints
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by covenant-sacrifice bound to him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}that the heavens may declare his justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for a God of justice is he. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Hear, O my people, and I will speak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and protest to you, O Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I am the {\scaps Lord}, your God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Not for your sacrifices will I reprove you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your burnt-offerings are ever before me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Not a bullock will I take from your house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor male goats out of your folds;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for all beasts of the forest are mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the kine on a thousand hills.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I know all the birds of the air,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all that moves on the fields is mine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Were I hungry, I would not tell you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the world and its fulness are mine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Am I such as to eat bulls\uc1\u8217* flesh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or drink the blood of goats?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Offer to God a thank-offering,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pay the Most High your vows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Summon me in the day of distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will rescue you, so will you honour me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But to the wicked God says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*What right have you to talk of my statutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or take my covenant into your mouth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}while you yourself hate correction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and cast my words behind you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When you see a thief, you run with them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with adulterers you keep company.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}You let your mouth loose for evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your tongue contrives deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You shamefully speak of your kin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and slander your own mother\uc1\u8217*s son.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And because I kept silence at this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did take me for one like yourself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 But I will convict you and show you plainly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Now you who forget God, mark this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lest I rend you, past hope of deliverance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Those who bring a thank-offering honour me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but to those: who follows my way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will show the salvation of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 51 \uc1\u8211* God be Merciful to Me, the Sinner

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 51} For the leader. A psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet come to him after he had been with Bathsheba.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In your kindness, O God, be gracious to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your own great pity blot out my transgressions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Wash me clean of my guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make me pure of my sin.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For well I know my transgressions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my sin is ever before me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Against you, only you, have I sinned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and done that which is wrong in your sight:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you therefore are just when you speak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and clear when you utter judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}See! In guilt was I brought to the birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in sin did my mother conceive me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It\uc1\u8217*s the innermost truth you desire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 give me therefore true wisdom of heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Purge me clean with hyssop,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wash me whiter than snow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Fill me with joy and gladness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the bones you have broken rejoice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Hide your face from my sins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and blot out my guilt altogether.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Create me a clean heart, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 put a new steadfast spirit within me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Cast me not forth from your presence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 withdraw not your holy spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Give me back the joy of your help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with a willing spirit sustain me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I will teach your ways to transgressors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and sinners shall turn to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Save me from blood, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my tongue shall ring out your faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Open my lips, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my mouth shall declare your praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For in sacrifice you have no pleasure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in gifts of burnt-offering no delight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The sacrifice pleasing to God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is a spirit that is broken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a heart that is crushed, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will not despise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Do good in your pleasure to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 build the walls of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then will you welcome the due forms of sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 then on your altars shall bullocks be offered.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 52 \uc1\u8211* The Doom of Arrogance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 52} For the leader. A maskil of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul that David had gone to Abimelech\uc1\u8217*s house.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Why glory in mischief, you hero?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God\uc1\u8217*s kindness is all the day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Engulfing ruin you plot,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your tongue like a razor sharpened,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you practiser of deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Evil, not good, you love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and falsehood, not words of truth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But you love all words that devour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a tongue that is given to deceit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But God, on his part, shall destroy you forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 grasp you and pluck you out of your tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and root you out of the land of the living. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Smitten with awe at the sight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the righteous shall laugh at you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Look\uc1\u8217* (they will say) \uc1\u8216*at the hero
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who did not make God his stronghold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but trusted in his great wealth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in the strength of his riches.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But I am like a fresh olive-tree
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the house of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I trust in the kindness of God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for ever and evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will render you thanks for ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for what you have done.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will tell how good you are
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the presence of those who love you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 53 \uc1\u8211* The Folly of Denying God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 53} For the leader. On mahalath. A maskil of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Fools say in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*There is no God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Vile, hateful their life is;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not one does good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}From heaven God looks out
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on humans, to see
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 if any are wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and care for God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But all have turned bad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the taint is on all;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not one does good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no, not one.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Have they learned their lesson,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those workers of evil?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who ate up my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 eating, devouring,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 never calling to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Sore afraid will they be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 where no fear was;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when God scatters the bones
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of the godless people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will be put to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when God rejects them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}If only help from Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 would come for Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When God brings his people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a change of fortune,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 how glad will be Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Israel how joyful!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 54 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Oppression

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 54} For the leader. With stringed instruments. A maskil of David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, \uc1\u8220*David is in hiding among us\uc1\u8221*.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Save me, O God, by your name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by your power secure for me justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Listen, O God, to my prayer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend to the words of my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For proud men have risen against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and terrible men seek my life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 men who do not set God before them. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But see! God is my helper,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is sustaining my life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let their evil fall back on my foes:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 cut them off in your faithfulness, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then will I bring you glad sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praising your gracious name;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for from all distress you have saved me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and feasted my eyes on my foes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 55 \uc1\u8211* Betrayed by a Friend

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 55} For the leader. With stringed instruments. A maskil of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Listen, God, to my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Don\uc1\u8217*t hide yourself from my pleading.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hear me, and answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for bitter is my lament.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I am wild with the noise of the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the clamour of the ungodly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for they hurl disaster upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and attack me with fury.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My heart shudders within me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 terrors of deaths press on me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}fear and trembling attack me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and horror wraps me round.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}O for the wings of a dove:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would fly away and rest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I would wander far away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 find refuge in the wilderness. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I would find myself a shelter
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from raging wind and tempest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Confuse them, {\scaps Lord}, upset their plans;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I see violence and strife in the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}By day and by night they make their rounds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the city walls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 while within is crime and trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}within is ruin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her market-place is never free
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of deceit and tyranny.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Treacherous Friend

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The taunts were not those of a foe
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I could have borne;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the disdain was not that of an enemy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I could have shunned them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}but it was you, my equal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my dear and familiar friend.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We used to be so close,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 together we walked in God\uc1\u8217*s house with the crowd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}May death suddenly take them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may they go down to Sheol alive,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for evil lives in their homes and their hearts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But I will call on God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} will save me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Evening and morning and noon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I lament and moan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will hear my voice;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}though I am attacked by many
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he will rescue me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 unharmed from the war.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}God, who sits on his ancient throne
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will hear and will humble them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for they never change,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they never fear God. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My friend turned against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 betrayed his word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}His mouth was smoother than butter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but war filled his heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His words were softer than oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but sharper than swords.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Cast your burden on the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he will sustain you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will never let the righteous
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be shaken.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But you, God, will hurl them down
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the deepest pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Bloody and treacherous people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will not live out half their days;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I will trust you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 56 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer of Trust in God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 56} For the leader. On jonath elem rehokim. Of David. A michtam, when the Philistines seized him in Gath.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O God, be gracious to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for people trample upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the day righting and pressing me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}All the day enemies trample me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 many there be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who contend with me bitterly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the day of my terror
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I trust in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In God I maintain my cause,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in God I fearlessly trust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What can flesh do to me?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They torture me all the day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they ceaselessly plan to hurt me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}banded together in secret,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 watching my every step,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as those who hope for my death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Pay them out for their sin, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hurl down the strong in your anger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You yourself count my wanderings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Put in your bottle my tears
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are they not in your book?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then shall my foes be turned back
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day that I call.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Of this I am sure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because God is for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In God I maintain my cause,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the {\scaps Lord} I maintain my cause.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In God I fearlessly trust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 what can people do to me?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Your vows are upon me, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will render thank-offerings to you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}because you have saved me from death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my feet from stumbling,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to the end that I walk before God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the light of the living.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 57 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Protection from Persecution

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 57} For the leader. Al tashheth. A michtam of David, when he fled from Saul into a cave.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Be gracious, O God, be gracious to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for in you I take shelter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In your sheltering wings I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till ruin be over past.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I cry to the Most High God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the God who accomplishes for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He will send me his succour from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will thrust away those who would trample me. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In the midst of lions I lie,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who devour human prey.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their teeth are spears and arrows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their tongue is a sharpened sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Be exalted, God, o\uc1\u8217*er the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your glory o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They set a net for my feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but in it was their own foot caught.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Before me they dug a pit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but they fell into it themselves. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}My heart is steadfast, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heart is steadfast.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I would sing, I would make music;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}awake, my soul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Awake, harp and lyre;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would wake the dawn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I would praise you among the peoples, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and make music among the nations to you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for great to heaven is your love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your faithfulness to the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Be exalted, God, o\uc1\u8217*er the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your glory o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 58 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Vengeance on Unjust Judges

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 58} For the leader. Al tashheth. Of David. A michtam.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Do you speak what is right, you gods?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With equity judge you your people?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In the land you practise iniquity \uc1\u8211* all of you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 violence do you dispense with your hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The wicked go astray from the womb
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 liars take the wrong path from their birth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Venom have they like the venom of snakes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are like the deaf adder that stops her ears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and refuses to listen to the voice of the charmer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or binder of spells, no matter how cunning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}O God, break to pieces the teeth in their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tear out the great teeth of the young lions, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}May they melt away like running water!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Like tender grass, cut down may they be!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Like the snail that dissolves on its crawling path,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the birth untimely which sees not the sunlight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Faster than a thorn-fire heats your pots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will come with his tempest and sweep them away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The sight of such vengeance will gladden the righteous;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their feet they will wash in the blood of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}People will say, \uc1\u8216*Yes, the just are rewarded:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yes, on the earth is a God who is Judge.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 59 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Safety

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 59} For the leader. Al tashheth. Of David. A michtam, when Saul sent men to watch his house in order to kill him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Save me, O God, from my enemies;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 secure me from my assailants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Save me from those who do wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 save me from the bloodthirsty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For see! They lay ambush for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 strong men are banded against me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not for sin or transgression of mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for no guilt of mine, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}they run and make ready. Awake!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Come forth to meet me, and see!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You, O {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God of Israel, awake!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And punish the proud, every one;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 spare none of the traitors vile. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}At evening they come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and, howling like dogs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 make their round in the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Look at their venomous mouths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tongues like swords,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they think no one
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hears them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But you, {\scaps Lord}, laugh at them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you mock all the insolent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}My strength, I will sing to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for God is my sure retreat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}My God with his love will meet me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and feast my eyes on my foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Slay them not, lest my people forget,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let your hosts keep them roaming and wandering.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In their sinful speech snare them, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and may they be trapped in their pride,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the curses and lies that they utter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In your wrath make a clean end of them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that people, to the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may know that God rules in Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}At evening they come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and, howling like dogs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 make their round in the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}They roam about for a feast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and snarl, if they get not their fill.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But I will sing of your might;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will ring out your love in the morning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For to me you have been a sure refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a retreat in the day of my trouble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My strength, I will sing praise to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for God is my sure retreat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my faithful God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 60 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer after Defeat in Battle

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 60} For the leader. On shushan eduth. A michtam of David (for teaching), when he fought with Aram-naharaim and Aram-zobah, and Joab returned and defeated twelve thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O God, you have spurned and broken us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 routing us in your wrath \uc1\u8211* restore us!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You have shaken the land and cleft it;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 heal its tottering breaches.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You have made your people drink hardship,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and given us wine of reeling.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You have given those who fear you a banner,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a rallying-place from the bow, {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for the rescue of your beloved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Save by your right hand and answer us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}God did solemnly swear:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*As victor will I divide Shechem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and mete out the valley of Succoth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Mine is Gilead, mine is Manasseh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ephraim is the defence of my head,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Judah my sceptre of rule,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Moab the pot that I wash in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Edom \uc1\u8211* I cast my shoe over it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I shout o\uc1\u8217*er Philistia in triumph.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}O to be brought to the fortified city!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O to be led into Edom!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Have you not spurned us, O God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You do not march forth with our armies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Grant us help from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for human help is worthless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}With God we shall yet do bravely:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he himself will tread down our foes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 61 \uc1\u8211* Our God is a Strong Tower

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 61} For the leader. On stringed instruments. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Hear my cry, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be attentive to my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}From the ends of the earth I call
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 unto you, when my heart is faint:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 lead me to the rock
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that is high above me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For you are a refuge to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a strong tower in face of the foe.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}O to be guest in your tent forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hiding beneath your sheltering wings! {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For you, O God, do hear my vows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and grant the desires of those who fear you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Add many days to the life of the king;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may his years endure throughout all generations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In the presence of God be he throned forever;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may kindness and faithfulness watch over him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And I will sing praise to your name forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 paying my vows day after day.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 62 \uc1\u8211* Quietness and Confidence

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 62} For the leader. On jeduthun. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I wait alone in silence for God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From him comes my help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Yes, he is my rock, my help, my retreat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I shall not be shaken too sorely.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}How long will you, all of you, batter a man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as one might a leaning wall?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}From his height
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are planning to topple him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They take pleasure in falsehood; they bless with their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but inwardly they curse. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I wait alone in silence for God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for from him comes my hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yes, he is my rock, my help, my retreat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I shall not be shaken too sorely.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On God rests my honour and safety,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in God is my strong rock, my refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Trust in him, all you people assembled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pour out your heart in his presence;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God is a refuge for us. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The lowly are nought but a breath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the lofty are but an illusion:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the balances up they go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are lighter than breath altogether.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Trust not in gain of extortion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 set no vain hopes in robbery.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As for wealth, if it bears fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 set not your heart upon it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}One thing God has uttered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 two things there are which I heard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that power belongs to God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and to you, too, O {\scaps Lord}, belongs kindness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you requite each person
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 according to what they have done.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 63 \uc1\u8211* Athirst for God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 63} A psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O God, my God, you, you do I seek:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heart thirsts for you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 my body faints for you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in a parched and waterless land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}As I in the temple have seen you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 beholding your power and your glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}for better than life is your kindness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my lips shall utter your praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So, while I live, I will bless you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lift up my hands in your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As with marrow and fat am I feasted;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with joyful lips I will praise you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I call you to mind on my bed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and muse on you in the night watches;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for you have been my help,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I joyfully sing in the shadow of your wings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I cling close after you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your right hand holds me up.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But those who seek after my life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shall go down to the depths of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}given o\uc1\u8217*er to the power of the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or as prey for jackals to devour.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the king shall rejoice in God:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all who own his allegiance will glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the mouth of the false shall be stopped.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 64 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Malicious Foes

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 64} For the leader. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Hear, O my God, the voice of my lament:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 guard my life from the dread of the foe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hide me from villains who secretly plot,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the blustering throng of the workers of evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}who have sharpened their tongue like a sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and aimed bitter words like arrows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}which from ambush they launch at the blameless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shooting swiftly and unafraid.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They strengthen their wicked purpose,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they tell of the snares they have hidden,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they say to themselves, \uc1\u8216*Who can see?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They think out their crimes full cunningly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hidden deep in their crafty hearts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But God with his arrow will shoot them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 swiftly shall they be smitten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For their tongue he will bring them to ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all will shudder with horror at the sight of them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then every person, touched to awe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as they ponder what God has wrought,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will tell the tale of his deeds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In the {\scaps Lord} shall the righteous rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in him shall they take refuge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all the true-hearted shall glory.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 65 \uc1\u8211* Hymn for a Thanksgiving Festival

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 65} For the leader. A psalm of David. A song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It is seemly to praise you, O God, in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to you shall the vow be performed in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}O you who hear prayer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 unto you shall all flesh come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Our sins are too mighty for us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our transgressions you only can cover them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Happy the person who you choose
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to live beside you in your courts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 O may we be filled with the joys
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of your house, of your holy temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In dread deeds you loyally answer us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O God of our salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whom all ends of the earth put their trust in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and islands far away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}By your strength you establish the hills,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you are armed with might;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}you still the roaring of seas,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the turmoil of nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}so that those who live at earth\uc1\u8217*s bounds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are awed at your signs:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the lands of the sunrise and sunset
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you make to ring with joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You visit and water the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you greatly enrich her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with the river of God, which is full of water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You prepare the corn thereof,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}watering her furrows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 settling her ridges;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you make her soft with showers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and bless what grows thereon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You crown the year with your goodness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your chariot tracks drip with fatness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The desert pastures are lush,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the hills greened with joy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The meadows are clothed with flocks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the valleys are covered with corn;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they shout to each other and sing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 66 \uc1\u8211* Thanksgiving for National Deliverance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 66} For the leader. A song. A psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Shout to God, all the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}sing praise to his glorious name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sing his glorious praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Say to God, \uc1\u8216*How dread are your works,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so great is your might that your enemies cringe to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}All the earth does homage to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 singing praises to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 singing praise to your name.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Come and see what God has done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 awe-inspiring is he in his works among people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He turns the sea into dry land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and people cross the river on foot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let us therefore rejoice in him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}the mighty Ruler eternal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose eyes keep watch on the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that no rebel lift up his head. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O bless our God, you peoples;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sound aloud his praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}who keeps us in life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and keeps our feet from slipping.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For you, God, have tested us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 have tried us, as silver is tried.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You did bring us into prison,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and put chains upon us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}you did let people ride over our head.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 We went through fire and through water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but you led us out to a spacious place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I will enter your house with burnt-offerings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will pay to you my vows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}which my open lips have uttered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 arid my mouth has declared in my straits.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will offer you offerings of fatlings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the odour of burning rams,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will sacrifice bullocks with goats. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Come and hear my story
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all who fear God \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of what he has done for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For my mouth had no sooner invoked him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than his praise was under my tongue.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Had I cherished sin in my heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} would never have listened.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But assuredly God has listened,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and attended to my loud prayer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Blessed be God, who turned not aside
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my prayer, nor withdrew his kindness from me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 67 \uc1\u8211* A Harvest Thanksgiving

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 67} For the leader. On stringed instruments. A psalm. A song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Bless us, O God, with your favour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the light of your face fall upon us; {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}that the world may know your way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all nations your power to save.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let the peoples praise you, O God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the peoples all of them praise you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let the nations ring out their joy;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you govern the peoples with equity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and guide the nations on earth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let the peoples praise you, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the peoples, all of them, praise you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The earth has yielded her increase
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by the blessing of God, our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}May this blessing of ours win people to him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to all the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 68 \uc1\u8211* Victory

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 68} For the leader. Of David. A psalm. A song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God arises, his enemies scatter:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they who hate him flee before him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}As smoke before wind is driven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as wax melts before fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so before God vanish the wicked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But the righteous rejoice in God\uc1\u8217*s presence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they exult with exceeding joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Sing to God, make music to his name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his name is the {\scaps Lord}, praise him who rides on the clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and exult in his presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Father of orphans, defender of widows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is God in his holy abode.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}God brings home the lonely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he leads forth the prisoner to comfort,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that none but the rebel lives cheerless.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}God, when you went in front of your people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your march through the desert, {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}earth shook, the heavens poured rain
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the presence of God, Sinai\uc1\u8217*s God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 at the presence of God, Israel\uc1\u8217*s God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Rain in abundance, God, you did sprinkle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 restoring the languishing land of your heritage.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}A dwelling therein your people found:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your goodness, O God, you did care for the poor.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} spoke the glad tidings of victory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a great army of women proclaim it:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Kings of armies they flee, they flee,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the housewife divides the spoil:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}dove\uc1\u8217*s wings covered with silver
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and pinions with shimmer of gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}set with stones, like snow upon Zalmon.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a mountain of peaks is the mountain of Bashan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}You high-peaked mountains, why look you askance
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the mountain which God has desired for his home
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whereon the {\scaps Lord} will live forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The chariots of God are twice ten thousand:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} came from Sinai, his holy place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}You did mount the height with trains of your captives,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and gifts that you had received from the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The rebels shall live with the {\scaps Lord} God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} who sustains us daily,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the God who is also our saviour. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Our God is a God who is saviour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The ways of escape from death
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are known to the {\scaps Lord} God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yes, God will shatter the head of his foes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the rough scalp of those who strut on in their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The {\scaps Lord} said: \uc1\u8216*I will bring you home from Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 home from the depths of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}that your feet you may bathe in blood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your dogs lick their share of the foe.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}In the temple appear God\uc1\u8217*s triumphal processions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 processions in praise of my king and my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}with singers in front, and minstrels behind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and maidens with timbrels between them, singing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*You of the well-spring of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bless the {\scaps Lord} God in the dance.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}There, in front, is Benjamin the little,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the princes of Judah beside them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the princes of Zebulon, princes of Naphtali.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}God, show your strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your godlike might,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as you did in the past,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}from your temple that crowns Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Kings shall bring tribute to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Rebuke the beast of the reed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the herd of bulls, with the calves of the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Trample down the lovers of lies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Scatter the nations whose joy is in war.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}May they come from Egypt with gifts of oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ethiopia haste with full hands to God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Sing to God, O you kingdoms of earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make melody to the {\scaps Lord}. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Praise him who rides on the ancient heavens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 See! He utters his voice, his mighty voice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Ascribe strength to the God over Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose strength and majesty live in the skies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Awe-inspiring is God in his holy place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it is Israel\uc1\u8217*s God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who gives strength and might to his people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Blessed be God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 69 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance and Vengeance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 69} For the leader. On shoshannim. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Save me, O God; for the waters
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are threatening my life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I am sunk in depths of mire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 where ground there is none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I am come into deep deep waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the flood overwhelms me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I am weary of crying, my throat is parched,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my eyes are wasted with waiting for God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}More than the hairs of my head
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are those who wantonly hate me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 More than my bones in number
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are those who are falsely my foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 That which I never robbed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 how am I then to restore?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}O God, you know my folly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my guilt is not hidden from you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Through me let not any be shamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who wait for you, {\scaps Lord} God of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Through me let not those be confounded
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who seek you, O God of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It\uc1\u8217*s in your cause that I have borne taunts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my face has been covered with shame;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I became to my kindred a foreigner,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to my mother\uc1\u8217*s sons a stranger.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It was zeal for your house that consumed me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the insults they hurled at you fell upon me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When I chastened myself with fasting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they took occasion to taunt me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When I put on a garment of sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they made me the theme of a taunt-song.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Those who sit in the gate make sport of me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the music of drunken songs.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I pray to you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for a time of favour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In your great love answer me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with your loyal help, save me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}from sinking down in the mire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Lift me out of the deep deep waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}that the rushing flood may not drown me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that the deep may not swallow me up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the pit close her mouth upon me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Answer me, {\scaps Lord}, in your gracious kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 turn to me in your great compassion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Hide not your face from your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I am in trouble; O answer me speedily.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Draw near to me, redeem me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of my enemies, ransom me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}You know how I am insulted;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your sight are all my foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Insult has broken my heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 past cure are my shame and confusion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For pity I looked \uc1\u8211* there was none!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And for comforters, but I found none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Poison they gave me for food,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to slake my thirst they gave vinegar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}May their table, outspread, be a trap to them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their peace-offerings be a snare.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}May their eyes be darkened and blind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make them shake without ceasing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Pour your indignation upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let your burning wrath overtake them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}May their camp be a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in their tents be there none to live.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For those whom you struck, they persecute,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those whom you wounded, they pain yet more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Charge them with sin upon sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may they not be acquitted by you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}From the book of life be they blotted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may their names not be written with the righteous.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Lift me, O God, by your help
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 above my pain and misery.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then will I praise God in song
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and magnify him with thanksgiving,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}which shall please the {\scaps Lord} better than ox,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or than bullock with horns and hoofs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The oppressed shall rejoice at the sight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You who seek after God, let your heart revive.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}For the {\scaps Lord} listens to the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he does not despise his prisoners.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Let the heavens and the earth sing his praises,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the seas, and all creatures that move in them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For God will bring help to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and build up the cities of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his people shall live there in possession.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}His servants\uc1\u8217* children shall have it for heritage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who love him shall live therein.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 70 \uc1\u8211* A Cry for Help in Persecution

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 70} For the leader. Of David. For commemoration.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Quickly, God, deliver me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hasten to help me, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May those who are seeking my life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be ashamed and confounded.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}May those who delight in my hurt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be defeated and brought to dishonour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But may all who seek after you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 rejoice and be glad in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 May all who love your salvation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 say, \uc1\u8216*Glory to God,\uc1\u8217* evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I am weak and needy:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make haste, God, to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You are my help and deliverer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 {\scaps Lord}, don\uc1\u8217*t delay.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 71 \uc1\u8211* Forsake me not, when I am Old

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 71}In you, O {\scaps Lord}, I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let me never be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In your faithfulness save me and rescue me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bend your ear to me and save me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Be to me a rock of defence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a fortified house, to save me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for my rock and my fortress are you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Save me, my God, from the hand of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the grasp of the unjust and cruel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For you, {\scaps Lord}, are my hope,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in whom from my youth I have trusted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}On you have I leaned from my birth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb it was you who did draw me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In you is my hope evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I have been as a wonder to many,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you are my refuge and strength.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All the day long my mouth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is filled with your praise and your glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Cast me not off in the time of old age;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when my strength is spent, forsake me not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For my foes whisper against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they who watch me take counsel together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*God has left him,\uc1\u8217* they say: \uc1\u8216*pursue
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and seize him, for he is helpless.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}O God, be not far from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 haste, O my God, to my help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Put my foes to shame and dishonour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with insult and shame be they covered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But I will never stop hoping,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and more and yet more will I praise you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All the day long shall my mouth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tell your faithfulness and your salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 though I know not how they may be counted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will tell of the might of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your faithfulness praise, you alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}You have taught me, O God, from my youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and till now have I told of your wonders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Even in old age and grey hair,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O God, do not forsake me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Still would I tell of your might
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 unto all generations to come.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Your power and your justice, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 extend as far as the heavens:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for great are the things you have done.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who is like you, O God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You have caused us to see troubles many,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but you will revive us again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the depths of the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will bring me up again.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}You will multiply my greatness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and comfort me again.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So with harp I will praise you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your faithfulness, O my God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and make music to you on the lyre,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O you Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}My lips shall ring out their joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my mouth shall sing praises to you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all of me, which you have redeemed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yes, all the day long shall my tongue
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 utter your righteousness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for ashamed and confounded are they
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who were seeking my hurt.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 72 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for a Just and Glorious Reign

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 72} Of Solomon.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Give the king, O God, your own spirit of justice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your spirit of right to the son of the king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}that with right he may judge your people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your downtrodden ones with justice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}May the mountains bear weal for the people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the hills yield fruits of justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The weak may he help to their rights,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may he save the sons of the needy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and crush the oppressor in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}May he live as long as the sun,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while the moon shines \uc1\u8211* for ages and ages.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}May he be like the rain on the meadow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like showers that water the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In his days may justice flourish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and welfare abound, till the moon be no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}May he reign from ocean to ocean,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the river to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}May his foes bow down before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his enemies lick the dust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}May tribute be rendered by kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of the isles and of Tarshish;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may gifts be brought by the kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of Sheba and Seba.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}May all kings fall prostrate before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all nations yield him their service.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For he saves the poor when he cries,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the helpless and the downtrodden.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He pities the weak and the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he saves the lives of the poor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He redeems them from wrong and from violence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for dear is their blood in his sight.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Long may he live;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and may gold of Sheba be given him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 prayer, too, be made for him ceaselessly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the day long may men bless him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}May the land have abundance of corn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the tops of the hills may it wave.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 May the fruit thereof flourish like Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may men spring from the city like grass of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}May his name be blessed forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may his fame endure as the sun.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 May all nations envy his blessedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all tribes of the earth call him happy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\i {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} God, Israel\uc1\u8217*s God,}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i who alone does wonders;}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\i {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And blest be forever his glorious name.}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i Let all the earth be filled with his glory.}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i Amen and Amen.}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Here end the prayers of David, son of Jesse.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 Book Three

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 73 \uc1\u8211* Fellowship with God Here and Hereafter

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 73} A psalm of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Yes, God is good to the upright,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} to the pure in heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But my feet were almost gone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my steps had nearly slipped,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}through envy of godless braggarts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I saw how well they fared.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For never a pang have they,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their body is sound and sleek.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They have no trouble like mortals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no share in human pain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So they wear their pride like a necklace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they put on the garment of wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}their eyes stand out with fatness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their heart swells with riotous fancies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their speech is mocking and evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 condescending and crooked their speech.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They have set their mouth in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while their tongue struts about on the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Small wonder that people resort to them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and drink deep draughts of their lore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*How does God know?\uc1\u8217* they say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*And has the Most High any knowledge?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}See! These are the godless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with wealth and ease ever increasing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yes, in vain have I kept my heart pure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and washed my hands in innocence;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}for all the day long was I plagued
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not a morning but I was chastised.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But to resolve to speak like they do
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 would be treachery to your children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So I sought to understand it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but a wearisome task it seemed:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}till I entered the holy world of God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and saw clearly their destiny.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yes, you set them on slippery places;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 down to destruction you hurl them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}One moment and then what a horror of ruin!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are finished and ended in terrors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Like a dream, when one wakes, shall they be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose phantoms the waker despises.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}So my bitterness of mind
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the pain that stabbed my heart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}show how dull I was and stupid
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 just like a beast before you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But I am always with you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have hold of my right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}By a plan of yours you guide me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will afterward take me to glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Whom have I in the heavens but you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And on earth there is none I desire beside you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Though flesh and heart waste away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet God is the rock of my heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet God is my portion forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For see! Those who are far from you must perish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you destroy all who are false to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But I am happy when close to God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} my God I have made my refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may recount all the things you have done.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 74 \uc1\u8211* Lament on the Devastation of the Temple

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 74} A maskil of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Why, O God, have you spurned us forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why smokes your wrath against the sheep of your pasture?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Remember the community you purchased of old
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to become by redemption the tribe of your heritage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Zion, the mountain you made your home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Rouse yourself, visit its ruins complete.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In the temple the foe has made havoc of all things.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Like lions your enemies roared through your house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 replacing our symbols by signs of their own,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}hacking, like woodsmen who lift
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 axes on thickets of trees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}smashing with hatchets and hammers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all of its carved work together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They have set your temple on fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the very ground they have outraged
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the place where lives your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They have said in their heart, \uc1\u8216*Let us utterly crush them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They have burned all the houses of God in the land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}No symbol of ours do we see any more:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no prophet is there any more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 none is with us who knows how long.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}How long, O God, is the foe to insult?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Shall the enemy spurn your name forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Why, O {\scaps Lord}, do you hold back your hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 why keep your right hand in the folds of your robe?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Yet God is our king from the ancient days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the midst of the earth working deeds of salvation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It was you who did cleave the sea by your might,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and shatter the heads of the ocean monsters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was you who did crush many-headed Leviathan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and give him as food to the beasts of the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}It was you who did cleave the fountains and torrents;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it was you who did dry the perennial streams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yours is the day; yours, too, is the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it was you who did establish the sun and the star.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It was you who did fix all the borders of earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 summer and winter it\uc1\u8217*s you who have made them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yet, for all this, the foe has insulted you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a nation of fools has reviled your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Do not give your dove to the beasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 do not forget your afflicted forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Look to the sleek ones \uc1\u8211* how full they are:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the dark places of earth are the dwellings of violence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}O let not the downtrodden turn back ashamed:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the poor and the needy sing praise to your name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Arise, God, and defend your cause:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 remember how fools all the day insult you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Do not forget the uproar of your enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the din of your foes that ascends evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 75 \uc1\u8211* God the Judge

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 75} For the leader; al tashheth. A psalm of Asaph, a song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
We praise you, God, we praise you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 we would call on your name and declare your wonders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*At the time I choose,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will judge fairly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Though earth melt and all her inhabitants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it is I who keep steady her pillars.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I say to the boasters, \uc1\u8216*Boast not\uc1\u8217*;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the wicked, \uc1\u8216*Lift not up your horn:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}lift not your horn on high,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 speak not boldly against the Rock.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For not from east nor west,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not from desert nor mountains;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but God himself is the judge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 humbling one and exalting another.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the hand of the {\scaps Lord} is a cup
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 foaming wine, richly spiced.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Out of this he pours a draught,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all the wicked of earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 must drain it down to the dregs.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But I will rejoice forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 singing praise to the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I will hew all the horns of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the horns of the just shall be lifted.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 76 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Victory

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 76} For the leader. With instrumental music. A psalm of Asaph, a song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God has made himself known in Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his name is great in Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}His tent is in Salem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his dwelling in Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}There he broke the lightning arrows,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shield, sword, and weapons of war. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Terrible is your splendour
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the everlasting mountains.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Despoiled were the stout of heart;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the sleep into which they had fallen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 none of the warriors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 could lift a hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}At your rebuke, God of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sank chariot and horse to sleep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Awful are you: who can stand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before you, when once you are angry?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The judgment you gave from heaven
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 frightened the earth into silence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}when God arose to judgment
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to save the oppressed of the earth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The fiercest will praise you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to you will the remnant hold festival.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Vow and pay to {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and let all who are round him bring presents.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He lops off the courage of princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with terror fills kings of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 77 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Preservation as in the Days of Old

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 77} For the leader. On Jeduthun. Of Asaph, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Loudly will I lift my cry to God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 loudly to God, so he hears to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In the day of my trouble I seek the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the night I lift my hands in prayer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 refusing all comfort.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When I think of God, I moan;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I muse, my spirit is faint. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When you hold my eyes awake,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I am restless and speechless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I think of the days of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 call to mind distant years.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I commune with my heart in the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I muse with inquiring spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Will the {\scaps Lord} cast us off forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will he be gracious no more?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Has his love vanished forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is his faithfulness utterly gone?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Has God forgotten to be gracious,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or in anger withheld his compassion?\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then I said, \uc1\u8216*This it is that grieves me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that the hand of the Most High has changed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will think of the deeds of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and remember your wonders of old.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will muse on all you have wrought,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and meditate on your deeds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then your way, O God, was majestic:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 what God was great as our God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You were a God who did marvels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did show your power to the world
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}by your arm you rescued your people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the children of Jacob and Joseph. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The waters saw you, O God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The waters saw you and shivered;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to their depths they trembled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Clouds poured torrents of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 thunder rolled in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your arrows sped to and fro.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Loud was the roll of your thunder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lightnings lit up the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Earth quaked and trembled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In your way, {\scaps Lord}, through the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your path through the mighty waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your footsteps were all unseen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You did guide your folk like a flock
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 78 \uc1\u8211* The Warnings of History

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 78} A maskil of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My people, attend to my teaching:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bend your ears to the words of my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}as I open my mouth in a poem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the riddling story of the past.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What we have heard and known,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and what our ancestors have told us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}we will not hide from their children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 We will tell to the next generation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the praises and might of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the wonders that he has done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He set up a testimony in Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a law he appointed in Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 which he commanded our ancestors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to make known to their children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}that the next generation should know it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that the children yet to be born
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 should arise and tell their children;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}that in God they might put their confidence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and not forget God\uc1\u8217*s works;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but that they might keep his commandments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and not be like their ancestors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a generation defiant and stubborn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a generation with heart unsteady,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and spirit unfaithful towards God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Ephraimites, armed bowmen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 turned back in the day of battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They did not keep God\uc1\u8217*s covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they refused to walk in his law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They forgot what he had done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the wonders he had shown them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He did wonders before their ancestors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the country of Zoan in Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Through the sea which he split he brought them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 making waters stand up like a heap;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}he led them by day with a cloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the night with a light of fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}From the rocks which he split in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he gave them to drink as of ocean\uc1\u8217*s abundance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He brought streams out of the rock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and made water run down like rivers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Yet they still went on sinning against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they defied the Most High in the desert.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They wilfully challenged God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 demanding the food that they longed for.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Is God able,\uc1\u8217* such was their challenge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*to spread in the desert a table?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}From the rock that he struck there gushed water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and torrents that overflowed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but can he also give bread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or provide his people with meat?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When the {\scaps Lord} heard this, he was furious,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fire was kindled on Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 anger flared up against Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For they put no trust in God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no confidence in his help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So he summoned the clouds above;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and, opening the doors of heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}he rained manna upon them for food,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and grain of heaven he gave them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Everyone ate the bread of angels;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he sent them food to the full.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He launched the east wind in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and guided the south by his power.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He rained meat upon them like dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 winged bird like the sand of the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}In the midst of their camp he dropped it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all around their tents.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}They ate and were more than filled;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he had brought them the thing they desired.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But the thing they desired became loathsome:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while their food was still in their mouths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}the wrath of God rose against them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He slew the stoutest among them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and laid low the young men of Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Yet for all this they sinned yet more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and refused to believe in his wonders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}So he ended their days in a breath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their years in sudden dismay.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When he slew them, then they sought after him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they turned and sought God with diligence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}They remembered that God was their rock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Most High God their redeemer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But they flattered him with their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lied to him with their tongue.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Their heart was not steady with him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they were faithless to his covenant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But he is full of pity:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he pardons sin and destroys not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Often he turns his anger away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 without stirring his wrath at all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}So he remembered that they were but flesh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 breath that passes and does not return.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But how often they rebelled in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and caused him grief in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}tempting God again and again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 provoking the Holy One of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}They did not remember his strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the day he redeemed from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}how he set his signs in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the country of Zoan his wonders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}He turned their canals into blood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their streams undrinkable.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}He sent forth flies, which devoured them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 frogs, too, which destroyed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Their crops he gave to the caterpillar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the fruits of their toil to the locust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}He slew their vines with hail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their sycamore trees with frost.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}He delivered their cattle to the hail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their flocks to bolts of fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}He let loose his hot anger among them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 fury and wrath and distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a band of destroying angels.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}He cleared a path for his anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 did not spare them from death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but gave them over to pestilence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}He struck down all the firstborn in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the first fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}He led forth his people like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he was guide to his flock in the desert.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Securely he led them, and free from fear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while their foes were drowned in the sea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}To his holy realm he brought them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the mountain his right hand had purchased.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}He drove out the nations before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and allotted their land for possession,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their tents for Israel to live in.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Yet they tempted and angered the Most High God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they did not observe his decrees.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}They drew back, false like their ancestors;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they failed like a treacherous bow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}Their shrines stirred him to anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their idols moved him to jealousy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}When God heard of this, he was furious,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he spurned Israel utterly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}He abandoned his home in Shiloh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the tent he had pitched among people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}He gave his strength up to captivity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his glory to the hands of the foe.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}He gave his people to the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he was furious with his own.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}Fire devoured their young men,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their maidens had no marriage-song.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}Their priests fell by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their widows could not weep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}Then the {\scaps Lord} awoke as from sleep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like a warrior flushed with wine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}and he beat back his foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 putting them to perpetual scorn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}He disowned the tent of Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he rejected the tribe of Ephraim;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}but he chose the tribe of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Mount Zion, which he loves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}And he built like the heights his sanctuary,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the earth which he founded forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}And he chose David his servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 taking him from the sheepfolds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}From the mother-ewes he brought him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to be shepherd to Jacob his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to Israel his inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}With upright heart did he shepherd them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with skilful hands did he guide them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 79 \uc1\u8211* A National Prayer for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 79} A psalm of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Heathen, O God, have come into your land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 defiling your holy temple,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and laying Jerusalem in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They have given the bodies of your dead servants
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the birds of the air to devour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the flesh of your faithful to the beasts of the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Round about Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have poured out their blood like water;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and there was no one to bury them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On every side our neighbours
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 revile us and mock us and jeer at us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}How long will you be angry, O {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Will your jealousy burn like fire forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Pour out your wrath on the nations that don\uc1\u8217*t know you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For Jacob they devoured,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have desolated his home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Do not remember against us our ancestors\uc1\u8217* sins;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O meet us soon with your pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for utterly weak are we.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Help us, O God our saviour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the renown of your name:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for your reputation deliver us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and cover over our sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Why should the nations say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Where is their God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let revenge for the outpoured blood of your servants
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be shown on the heathen before our eyes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}May the groans of the prisoner come before you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 free the children of death by your mighty arm.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Pay our neighbours back sevenfold
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the scorn they have heaped upon you, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then we, your people, the flock of your pasture,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will give thanks to you for evermore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and tell your praise to all generations.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 80 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Preservation of Israel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 80} For the leader. On shoshannim, eduth. Of Asaph, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Listen, Shepherd of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who leads Joseph like a flock of sheep;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from your throne on the cherubs shine forth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}before Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Stir up your mighty power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 come to our help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}God, restore us:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 show us the light of your face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so we may be saved.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}O {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 how long is your anger to smoke,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 despite the prayer of your people?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You have fed them with bread of tears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have made them drink tears by the measure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The scorn of our neighbours you make us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the laughing-stock of our foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}God of hosts, restore us:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 show us the light of your face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so we may be saved.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}A vine out of Egypt you brought;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did drive out the nations, and plant her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}in the ground you did clear she struck root,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and she filled all the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The shade of her covered the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 her branches the cedars of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}She sent forth her shoots to the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and her branches as far as the River.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Why have you torn down her fences, and left her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to be plucked at by all who pass by,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}to be gnawed by the boar from the forest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and devoured by the beasts of the field?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}O God of hosts, return:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 look down from heaven and see
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and visit this vine, and restore her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}the vine which your right hand has planted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}She is burned with fire and cut down
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before your stern face they are perishing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Support the one you have chosen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the one you have raised for yourself;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}then from you we will never draw back.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Preserve us, and we will call on your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Lord}, God of hosts, restore us:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Show us the light of your face,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so we may be saved.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 81 \uc1\u8211* For the Feast of Tabernacles

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 81} For the leader. On the gittith. Of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Sing aloud to God our strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shout for joy to the God of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Raise a song, sound the timbrel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sweet lyre and harp.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On the new moon blow the horn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the full moon, the day of our festival.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For this is a statute for Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a ruling of the God of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}a witness he set up in Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when he marched against Egypt\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 where he heard an unknown voice say:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*I removed from your shoulder the burden,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and freed your hands from the basket.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}At your call of distress I delivered you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the thundercloud I answered you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 At Meribah\uc1\u8217*s waters I tested you. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Listen, my people, to my warning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O Israel, if you would but listen!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There must not be a strange god among you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you must bow to no foreign god.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I am the {\scaps Lord} your God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who brought you up out of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Open your mouth, that I fill it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*But my people did not listen to my voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Israel would have none of me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So to their own hard hearts I left them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to follow their own devices.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}O that my people would listen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that Israel would walk in my ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Soon would I humble their enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and turn my hand on their foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Those who hate the {\scaps Lord} would cringe before him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in everlasting terror.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But you would I feed with the richest wheat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with honey from the rock to your heart\uc1\u8217*s desire.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 82 \uc1\u8211* God the Upholder of Justice

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 82} A psalm of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
God has taken his stand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the divine assembly:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the midst of the gods he holds judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*How long will you crookedly judge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and favour the wicked? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Do right by the weak and the orphan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 acquit the innocent poor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Rescue the weak and the needy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 save them from the hand of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*They have neither knowledge nor insight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in darkness they walk to and fro,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while the earth\uc1\u8217*s foundations totter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It was I who appointed you gods,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 children of the Most High all of you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Yet like mortals you will surely die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will fall like any prince.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Arise, O God, judge the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all nations are yours by inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 83 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Destruction of the Enemies of Judah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 83} A song, a psalm of Asaph.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Do not keep silent, O God:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hold not your peace, be not still, God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For see! Your enemies roar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those who hate you lift up their heads,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}laying crafty plans for your people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and plotting against those you treasure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Come, let us wipe them out as a nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so Israel\uc1\u8217*s name will be mentioned no more.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For, conspiring with one accord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have made a league against you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Tents of Edom, and Ishmaelites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Moab, and the Hagrites.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Philistia, with the people of Tyre;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Syria, too, is confederate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have strengthened the children of Lot. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Deal with them as you dealt with Midian,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with Sisera, with Jabin, at the torrent of Kishon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}who at Endor were destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and became dung for the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}who said, \uc1\u8216*Let us take for ourselves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the meadows of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Whirl them, my God, like dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like stubble before the wind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As the fire that kindles the forest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as flame that sets mountains ablaze,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so with your tempest pursue them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 terrify them with your hurricane.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Make them blush with shame;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 until they seek your name, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Everlasting shame and confusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 disgrace and destruction be theirs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Teach those who you alone
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are most high over all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 84 \uc1\u8211* The Song of the Pilgrims

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 84} For the leader. On the gittith. Of the Korahites, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
How dearly loved is the place where you live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 {\scaps Lord} of hosts!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How I long and yearn
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the courts of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Now heart and flesh cry for joy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the living God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Even the sparrow has found her a home
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the swallow a nest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to lay her young,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 near your altar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my king and my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Happy those who live in your house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praising you evermore. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Happy those whose strength is in you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 people with pilgrim hearts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}As they pass through the valley of tears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they make it a place of fountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 clothed with the blessings of early rain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}From rampart to rampart on they march,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till at last God reveals himself in Zion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Lord}, God of hosts, hear my prayer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend, O God of Jacob. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Behold, O God, our defender,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and look upon your anointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for better a single day in your courts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than a thousand in my own chambers:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 better stand at the door of the house of my God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than live in the tents of ungodliness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}for the {\scaps Lord} is sun and shield,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} gives grace and glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He withholds no good thing from the life that is blameless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 happy those whose trust is in you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 85 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for National Restoration

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 85} For the leader. Of the Korahites, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Once, {\scaps Lord}, you did favour your land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 granting change of fortune to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}forgiving the guilt of your people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pardoning all their sin, {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}withdrawing all your fury,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 turning from your hot anger.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Restore us, O God our saviour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 put away your displeasure against us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Will you cherish your anger against us forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 prolonging your wrath to all generations?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Will you not revive us again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that your people may be glad in you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Show us your kindness, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 grant us your salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let me hear what God the {\scaps Lord} will speak;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he will speak of peace
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to his people, to those who love him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and turn their hearts to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Soon those who fear him shall see how he saves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and glory shall live in our land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Kindness and loyalty meet;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 peace and righteousness kiss.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Loyalty springs from the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 righteousness looks from the sky.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord} shall give all that is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our land yielding its increase,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}righteousness marching before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and peace on the path he treads.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 86 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Divine Guidance and Favour

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 86} A prayer of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Incline your ear, {\scaps Lord}, and answer me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I am afflicted and needy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Guard me, for I am loyal:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 save your servant, who trusts in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, be gracious to me, for you are my God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I cry to you all the day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Gladden the heart of your servant;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for to you, {\scaps Lord}, I set my hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For you, {\scaps Lord}, are good and forgiving,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 rich in love towards all who call on you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Listen, O {\scaps Lord}, to my prayer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend to my plea for mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In the day of my trouble I call on you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with assurance that you will answer me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}None of the gods is like you, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor are any works like yours.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}All the nations you have made
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will come and bow down before you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 giving glory, O {\scaps Lord}, to your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For great are you, and a doer of wonders;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you alone are God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Teach me, O {\scaps Lord}, your way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may walk in your truth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so my heart shall rejoice in your name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will give you thanks, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with all my heart, my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will honour your name forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For great is your love towards me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the depths of Sheol you have saved me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Haughty men have risen up against me, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a band of the violent seeking my life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who think nothing of you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But you are a God of pity and grace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 patient and rich in kindness and faithfulness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 turn to me with your grace, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Grant your strength to your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and save the child of your handmaid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Show me a sign of your favour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which those who hate me may see with confusion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 since you, {\scaps Lord}, are my helper and comforter.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 87 \uc1\u8211* Zion, City of God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 87} Of the Korahites, a psalm. A song.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
On the holy mountain stands
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the city he founded.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} loves the gates of Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Glorious things he is speaking of you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you city of God. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Among those who are mine I name Rahab and Babylon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Philistia, Tyre, Ethiopia,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their people will say I was born in Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As for Zion it will be said
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 each and all were born in her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} will preserve her.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} will count, when enrolling the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*This one was born there, and that one was born there.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Singers and dancers alike will say
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*All my springs are in you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 88 \uc1\u8211* The Prayer of Despair

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 88} A Song, a psalm of the Korahites. To the leader: according to Mahalath Leannoth. A Maskil of Heman the Ezrahite.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O {\scaps Lord} my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I cry for help in the day-time,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the night my cry is before you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}let my prayer come into your presence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 incline your ear to my cry.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For I am sated with sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my life draws near to Sheol.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I am counted with those who go down to the pit;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
  without strength am I.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My home is among the dead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the slain that lie in the grave,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whom you remember no more
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 cut off as they are from your hand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In the deepest pit you have put me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in shadows deep and dark.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Your wrath lies heavy upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 waves of your anger roll over me. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You have put my friends far from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have made them shun me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I am shut in, and cannot escape,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}my eyes are wasted with sorrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I call on you, {\scaps Lord}, every day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 spreading my hands out to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the dead can you work wonders?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Can the shades rise again to praise you? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Can your kindness be told in the grave,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your faithfulness in the tomb?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Can your wonders be known in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or your help in the land of forgetfulness?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I cry for help to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the morning my prayer comes before you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Why, O {\scaps Lord}, do you spurn me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and hide your face from me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}From my youth I am wretched and dying,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I am numbed by the terrors I bear.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The fires of your wrath have passed over me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your terrors destroy me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}surging around me forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hemming me in altogether.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Those who love me you put far from me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the dark is my only friend.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 89 \uc1\u8211* The Promise to David

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 89} A Maskil of Ethan the Ezrahite.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will sing evermore of the love of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 proclaiming to all generations his faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For your love you did promise to build up forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your faithfulness firm as the heavens themselves.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I have made with my chosen a covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and sworn to David my servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}to establish his seed forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to build up his throne to all ages.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the holy assembly in heaven
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praised your marvellous faithfulness, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For who in the skies may compare with the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who is like the {\scaps Lord} among the gods?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A God to be feared in the holy assembly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 awful and great above all who are round him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}O {\scaps Lord} God of hosts, who is mighty as you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your strength and faithfulness, {\scaps Lord}, surround you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You are the {\scaps Lord} of the raging sea:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when its waves surge, it is you who still them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It was you who did pierce and crush Rahab in pieces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and scatter your foes by your mighty arm.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Yours are the heavens, yours also the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the world and its fulness, it\uc1\u8217*s you who did found them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The north and the south, it\uc1\u8217*s you have created them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Tabor and Hermon shout praise to your name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You have an arm with the might of a hero;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 strong is your hand, high uplifted your right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Justice and right are the base of your throne,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 kindness and faithfulness ever attend you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Happy the people who know the glad shout,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who walk, O {\scaps Lord}, in the light of your face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They exult in your name all the day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your righteousness they extol.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For you are our strength and our pride.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your favour will lift us to honour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For the holy {\scaps Lord} of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 keeps our defender and king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In a vision of old you did speak
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in this way to the one whom you loved:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*A crown I have set on the hero
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I chose to be over the people
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*I found my servant David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and anointed with holy oil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}My hand will be with him forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my arm will give him strength.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*No enemy will dare to assail him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the wicked to oppress him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}but his foes I will shatter before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will strike down those who hate him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*My loyal love shall attend him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will lift him to honour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I will set his hand on the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his right hand on the rivers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*As for him, he will call me \uc1\u8220*My father,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God, and my rock of salvation.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And I will make him my firstborn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 highest of kings on the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*My love will I keep for him ever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my covenant with him shall stand fast.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}His line will I make everlasting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his throne as the days of the heavens.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*If his children forsake my law,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and walk not as I have ordained;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}if they profane my statutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and do not keep my commandments;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*I will punish their sin with the rod,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their iniquity with scourges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But my love will I not take from him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor will I belie my faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*I will not profane my covenant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by changing the word that has passed my lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Once have I solemnly sworn
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I would not lie to David,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*that his line should endure forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his throne as the sun before me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}firm as the moon which for ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and ever is fixed in the sky.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But you have cast off in contempt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and been furious with your anointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}You have spurned the covenant with your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his sacred crown dashed to the ground.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}You have broken down all his walls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and laid his bulwarks in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}All who pass on their way despoil him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the scorn of his neighbours is he now.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}You have given his foes the victory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and made all his enemies glad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}You have turned back his sword from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did not lift him up in the battle.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}The sceptre you took from his hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his throne you did hurl to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}You have shortened the days of his youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and covered him with shame. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}How long, {\scaps Lord} will you hide you forever?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 How long are the fires of your wrath to burn?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Remember, {\scaps Lord}, the shortness of life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 how fleeting you made all people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Who can live without seeing death?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who can rescue their life from the clutch of Sheol? {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Where, {\scaps Lord}, is your kindness of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which you in your faithfulness swore to David?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Remember, O {\scaps Lord}, how your servants are mocked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 how I bear in my heart the scorn of all nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}The scorn which your enemies hurl, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which they hurl at the footsteps of your anointed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\i {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}Blest be the {\scaps Lord}, for ever and ever.}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i Amen and Amen.}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 Book Four

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 90 \uc1\u8211* Hymn of Eternity

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 90} A prayer of Moses, the man of God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps Lord}, you have been a home to us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 one generation after another.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Before the mountains were born,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or the earth and the world were brought forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from everlasting to everlasting
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you are God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You bring us back to the dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you summon mortals to return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For you see a thousand years
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as the passing of yesterday,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as a watch in the night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Your floods sweep them away;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they are like a dream,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or like grass which sprouts in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}which blossoms and sprouts in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but by evening is cut and withered.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For your anger consumes us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the heat of your wrath confounds us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Our sins you have set before you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our secrets in the light of your face.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For through your wrath our days are declining,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 we bring our years to an end as a sigh.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The span of our life is seventy years,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or, if we are strong, maybe eighty;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet is their breadth but empty toil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for swiftly they go, and we fly away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Who lays to heart the power of your anger?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or who stands in reverent awe of your wrath?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}O teach us to count our days
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so our minds may learn wisdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Return, O {\scaps Lord}; why so long?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Relent on your servants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Grant us your love to the full in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that all our days we may shout for joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Make us glad for the days you have humbled us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the evil years we have seen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Let your servants see you in action,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 show your majesty to their children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Let the grace of the {\scaps Lord} our God be upon us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 uphold what our hands are striving to do.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 91 \uc1\u8211* In the Shelter of the Most High

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 91}You whose home is the shelter of God Most High,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose abode is the shadow of God Almighty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}can say to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*My refuge, my fortress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God, in whom I trust.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For he saves you from fowler\uc1\u8217*s snare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from deadly plague,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}he shelters you with his pinions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and under his wings you can hide.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His truth will be a shield and buckler.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You need not fear the terror of night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the arrow that flies by day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}nor the plague that stalks in darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the pestilence raging at noon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A thousand may fall at your side,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ten thousand at your right hand:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but it will not draw near to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You will only look on with your eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and see how the wicked are punished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You have made the {\scaps Lord} your refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you have made the Most High your defence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You will never be met by misfortune,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no plague will come near your tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}for he orders his angels to guard you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wherever you go.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They will carry you with their hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so you don\uc1\u8217*t hurt your foot on a stone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You will trample down lions and snakes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tread on young lions and cobras.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Because of their love for me, I will deliver them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will protect those who trust my name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will answer their cry and be with them in trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bringing them forth into safety and honour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will give them a life of many days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will show them my salvation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 92 \uc1\u8211* The Ways of God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 92} A psalm. A song; for the sabbath day.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
It is good to give thanks to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to sing praise to your name, O Most High,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}to declare your love in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your faithfulness in the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}with voice and a ten-stringed harp,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with music that throbs on the lyre.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For you make me glad by your deeds, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the work of your hands I will ring out my joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}How great are your works, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 how deep are your thoughts!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The insensitive cannot know,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor can a fool understand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}that, though the wicked flourish like grass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and evildoers all blossom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they will perish forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But you are exalted forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For see! Your enemies, {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For see! Your enemies perish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all evildoers are scattered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But you lift me to honour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and anoint me afresh with oil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}My eyes will feast on my foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my ears will hear of the doom of the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The righteous will sprout like the palm,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
  will grow like a cedar of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In the house of the {\scaps Lord} are they planted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the courts of our God they will sprout.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They will still bear fruit in old age,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all sappy and fresh will they be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So they proclaim the {\scaps Lord} to be just,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my rock, in whom is no wrong.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 93 \uc1\u8211* The Lord, King of all the World

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 93}The {\scaps Lord} has taken his seat on the throne,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 clothed with majesty, armed with might.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Now the world stands firm, to be shaken no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}firm stands your throne from all eternity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 You are from everlasting.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The floods, O {\scaps Lord}, have lifted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the floods have lifted their voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the floods lift up their roar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But more grand than the great roaring waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 more grand than the ocean waves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 grand on the height stands the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}What you have ordained is most sure;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 most sure shall your house stand inviolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord}, for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 94 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Vengeance on the Cruel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\cf1\f1\fs22 94}Lord}, God of vengeance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God of vengeance, shine forth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Rise up, judge of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pay back the proud what they deserve.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, how long shall the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 how long shall the wicked exult,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}with their blustering arrogant words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their braggart and wicked speech,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}crushing your people, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and afflicting your heritage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}murdering widows and strangers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 slaying the fatherless?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They think that the {\scaps Lord} does not see,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the God of Jacob regard it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Take heed, you dullest of people;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when will you be wise, you fools?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Is he deaf, who shaped the ear?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is he blind, who fashioned the eye?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Can he who trains nations not punish them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he who teaches knowledge to people?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} knows the thoughts of people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that only a breath are they.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Happy are those whom you chasten,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and teach out of your law,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}keeping them calm in the day of misfortune,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till a pit be dug for the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For the {\scaps Lord} will not leave his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will not forsake his inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For the righteous shall come to their rights,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all true-hearted people shall follow them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Who will rise up for me against those who do evil?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who will stand up for me against workers of wrong?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Were it not for the help of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would soon have gone to the silent grave.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When I thought that my foot was slipping,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your kindness, {\scaps Lord}, held me up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When with cares my heart was crowded,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your comforts make me glad.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Can corrupt justice be your ally,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 framing mischief by statute?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They assail the life of the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and innocent blood condemn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the {\scaps Lord} is my sure retreat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my God is the rock of my refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He will bring back their sin upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for their wickedness he will destroy them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} our God will destroy them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 95 \uc1\u8211* For a Festival. A Hymn of Praise and a Solemn Warning

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 95}Come! Let us ring out our joy to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let us merrily shout to our rock of salvation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Before his face let us come with thanks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with songs of praise let us shout to him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For the {\scaps Lord} is a great God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 king above all gods.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In his hand are the depths of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the heights of the mountains are his.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The sea is his, for he made it:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the dry land was formed by his hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Come! Let us worship and bow
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on our knees to the {\scaps Lord} our creator.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For he is our God; and we
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are the people he tends, the sheep in his care.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If only you would heed his voice today:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Do not harden your hearts as at Meribah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or at Massah, that day in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}when your ancestors tempted and tried me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 though they had seen my deeds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*For forty years I was filled with loathing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for that generation, so I said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*A people with wandering hearts are they,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and ignorant of my ways.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So I solemnly swore to them in my anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that never would they enter my place of rest.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 96 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Rule

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 96}Sing to the {\scaps Lord} a new song,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sing to the {\scaps Lord}, all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Sing to the {\scaps Lord}, bless his name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from day to day herald his victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Tell his glory among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his wonders among all peoples.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For great is the {\scaps Lord} and worthy all praise;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 held in awe, above all gods:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for all the gods of the nations are idols,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} created the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Before him are splendour and majesty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 beauty and strength in his holy place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord}, you tribes of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} glory and strength.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ascribe to the {\scaps Lord} the glory he manifests:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bring you an offering, enter his courts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Bow to the {\scaps Lord} in holy array:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tremble before him, all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Say to the nations, \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} is king.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The world stands firm to be shaken no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He will judge the peoples with equity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let the heavens be glad and the earth rejoice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the sea and its fulness thunder.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Let the field, and all that is in it, exult;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the trees of the forest ring out their joy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}before the {\scaps Lord}: for he comes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he comes to judge the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will judge the world with justice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the nations with faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 97 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Judgment

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 97}The {\scaps Lord} is king, let the earth rejoice:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let her many isles be glad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Clouds and darkness are round about him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 justice and right are the base of his throne.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Fire goes before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and blazes around his steps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}his lightnings illumine the world:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the earth quakes at the sight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Mountains melt like wax
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before the {\scaps Lord} of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The heavens proclaim his justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all nations behold his glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Shamed are all image-worshippers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who make a boast of their idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All the gods bow before him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Zion is glad at the tidings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the towns of Judah rejoice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of your judgments, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For you are most high over all the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 greatly exalted above all gods.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} loves those who hate evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he guards the lives of the faithful:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the hand of the wicked he saves them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Light arises for the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and joy for the upright in heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Rejoice in the {\scaps Lord}, you righteous:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 give thanks to his holy name.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 98 \uc1\u8211* A Song of Praise to the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 98} A psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Sing a new song to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he has done wonders;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his right hand and holy arm
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 have won him the victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} has made his victory known,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and revealed to the eyes of the nations his righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Mindful he was of his kindness to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 faithful he was to the house of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All the ends of the earth have seen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the victory of our God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Shout, all the earth, to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 break into cries and music.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Play on the lyre to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the lyre and with loud melody.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}With trumpet and sound of horn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shout before the king.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Let the sea and its fulness roar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the world and the dwellers upon it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let the streams clap their hands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let the hills shout for gladness together
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}before the {\scaps Lord} for he comes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he comes to judge the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will judge the world with justice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the nations with equity.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 99 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Just and Holy Rule

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 99}The {\scaps Lord} is king; let the nations tremble:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is throned upon cherubs; let earth quake.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} is great in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is high over all the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let them praise your great and terrible name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Holy is he.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You are a king who loves justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 equity you have established:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 justice and right you have wrought for Jacob.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Exalt the {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bow down at his footstool.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Holy is he.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Among his priests were Moses and Aaron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Samuel among those who called on his name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They called to the {\scaps Lord}, and he gave them answer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they kept his commands and the statute he gave them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Lord} our God, you gave them answer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A God of forgiveness were you to them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who suffered their deeds to go unpunished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Exalt the {\scaps Lord} our God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bow down at his holy mountain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 For holy is the {\scaps Lord} our God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 100 \uc1\u8211* A Call to Worship

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 100} A psalm of praise.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Shout, all the earth, to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Serve the {\scaps Lord} with gladness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 approach him with ringing cries.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Be sure that the {\scaps Lord} alone is God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 It is he who has made us, and his we are
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his people, the sheep of his pasture.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Enter his gates with thanksgiving,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his courts with praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Give thanks to him, bless his name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For the {\scaps Lord} is good, his love is forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to all ages endures his faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 101 \uc1\u8211* A Model King

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 101} Of David, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
If kindness and justice I sing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 making melody to you, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I would look to the way that is blameless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and make it my own.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Within my own house I would walk
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with an innocent heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I would never direct my eyes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to a thing that is base.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The impulse to stray I abhor
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it shall not cling to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Far from me be perverseness of heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or kinship with evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Who slanders their neighbour in secret,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I bring them to silence:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 haughty looks and proud hearts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will not abide.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will favour the true in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they shall live in my court.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Those who walk in a way that is blameless
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will be my attendant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}No one will live in my house
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who practises guile.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No one that speaks a lie
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will abide in my presence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Morn by morn I will wholly wipe out
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the bad in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and cut off from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own city
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all workers of evil.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 102 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Pity and for the Restoration of Zion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 102} The prayer: for a weary and suffering person who pours out their grief to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Hear my prayer, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let my cry for help come to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hide not your face from me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of my distress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Incline your ear to me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I call, answer me speedily.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For my days pass away like smoke:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my bones are burned through as with fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My heart is scorched, withered like grass;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I forget to eat my bread.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}By reason of my loud groaning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my flesh clings to my bones.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Like a desert-owl of the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like an owl among ruins am I.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I make my sleepless lament
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like a bird on the house-top alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All the day wild foes revile me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 using my name for a curse.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For ashes have been my bread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and tears have been mixed with my cup.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Because of your passionate anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did raise me, then hurl me to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}My days come to an end, shadows lengthen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I wither like grass.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But you, O {\scaps Lord}, are enthroned forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your fame endures to all generations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You will arise and have pity on Zion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it\uc1\u8217*s time to be gracious; her hour has come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For even her stones are dear to your servants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 even the dust of her ruins they look on with love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the nations will revere the name of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all the kings of the earth his glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}when the {\scaps Lord} shall have built up Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and revealed himself in his glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}in response to the prayer of the destitute,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose prayer he will not despise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Let this be recorded for ages to come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that the {\scaps Lord} may be praised by a people yet unborn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For he shall look down from his holy height,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the heavens the {\scaps Lord} will gaze on the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}to hear the groans of the prisoner,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to free those who are doomed to die;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}that people may recount the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s fame in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the praise of him in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}when the nations are gathered together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the kingdoms, to worship the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He has broken my strength on the way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he has shortened my days.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}I will say, \uc1\u8216*My God, take me not hence
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the midst of my days.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Your years endure age after age.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Of old you have founded the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the heavens are the work of your hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They shall perish; but you do stand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They shall all wax old like a garment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and change as a robe you will change them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But you are the same, your years are endless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The children of your servants abide,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 evermore shall their seed be before you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 103 \uc1\u8211* Bless the Lord, O my Soul

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 103} Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all that is in me, his holy name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and forget not one of his benefits.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He pardons all your sins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he heals all your diseases.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He ransoms your life from the pit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he crowns you with kindness and pity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He gives you your heart\uc1\u8217*s desire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 renewing your youth like the eagle\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} executes justice \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and right for all who are wronged.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He revealed his ways to Moses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his acts to the children of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Full of pity and grace is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 patient, and rich in kindness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}he will not always chide,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor cherish his anger forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Not after our sins has he dealt with us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor requited us after our wickedness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For high as the heavens o\uc1\u8217*er the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is his love over those who fear him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Far as is east from the west
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 has he put our transgressions from us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}As a father pities his children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so the {\scaps Lord} pities those who fear him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}for well he knows our frame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he remembers that we are dust.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}A person\uc1\u8217*s days are as grass;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 blossoms like a flower of the meadow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At the breath of the wind it is gone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the place thereof knows it no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the love of the {\scaps Lord} is eternal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his kindness to children\uc1\u8217*s children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}to those who keep his covenant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and mindfully do his behests.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The {\scaps Lord} has set his throne in the heavens;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the whole world is under his sway.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, you angels of his,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 mighty heroes performing his word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, all you his hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you servants who do his will.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, all you his works,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 far as his sway extends.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 104 \uc1\u8211* The Hymn of Creation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 104}Bless the {\scaps Lord}, O my soul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} my God, you are very great,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 clad in awful splendour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}covered with robe of light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You stretch out the heavens like the cloth of a tent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He lays the beams of his chambers on water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He takes dark clouds for his chariot,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rides on the wings of the wind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He takes the winds for his messengers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the fire and the flame for his servants.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He founded the earth upon pillars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to sustain it unshaken forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}With the garment of ocean he covered it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 waters towered over the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But at your rebuke they fled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 scared by the roar of your thunder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}mountains rose, valleys sank down
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the place appointed for them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They dared not pass the bounds set for them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or cover the earth any more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He sent brooks into the valleys,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they meander between the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The wild beasts all drink from them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the wild asses quench their thirst.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The birds have their home by the banks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and sing in the branches.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}From his chambers above he gives drink to the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and satisfies earth with the vials of heaven.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He makes grass grow for the cattle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and herbs for people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He brings bread out of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}wine, to gladden hearts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 oil, to make faces shine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bread, to strengthen hearts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The trees of the {\scaps Lord} drink their fill
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the cedars he planted on Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}where the little birds build their nest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the stork whose home is the cypress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The high hills are for the wild goats,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the rocks are for coneys to hide in.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He created the moon to mark seasons,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and told the sun when to set.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You make it dark: night comes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when all the wild beasts creep out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Young lions that roar for their prey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 seeking their meat from God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}At sunrise they slink away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lie down in their dens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then people go forth to their work,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and toil till evening.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}How many, O {\scaps Lord}, are your works,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all of them made in wisdom!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The earth is filled with your creatures.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And there is the great broad sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 where are countless things in motion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 living creatures, both great and small.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}There go the ships,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Leviathan you made to play there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They all look in hope to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to give them their food in due season.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And you give with open hand;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they gather and eat to their heart\uc1\u8217*s desire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When you hide your face, they are terrified;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when you take their breath away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they die and go back to their dust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But a breath from your lips creates them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and renews the face of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}May the glory of the {\scaps Lord} be forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may the {\scaps Lord} rejoice in his works.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}A glance of his makes the earth tremble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a touch of his makes the hills smoke.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I will sing to the {\scaps Lord} while I live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will play to my God while I am.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}May my musing be sweet to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I rejoice in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But may sinners be swept from the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the wicked vanish forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O my soul, bless the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 105 \uc1\u8211* The Inspiration of the Past

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 105}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord}, call on his name:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make known his deeds among the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Sing to him, make music to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 tell of all his wondrous works.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Make your boast in his holy name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be glad at heart, you who seek the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Seek after the {\scaps Lord} and his strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 seek his face evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Remember the wonders he did,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his portents, the judgments he uttered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}you who are offspring of Abraham, his servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the children of Jacob, his chosen ones.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He is the {\scaps Lord} our God:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in all the earth are his judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He remembers forever his covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his promise for a thousand generations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The covenant he made with Abraham,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the oath he swore to Isaac,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and confirmed as a statute to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a pact everlasting to Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}to give them the land of Canaan
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as the lot which they should inherit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And when they were very few,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 few and but pilgrims therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}wandering from nation to nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 journeying from people to people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}he allowed no one to oppress them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 even punishing kings for their sakes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He forbade them to touch his anointed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or do any hurt to his prophets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When he called down famine on the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and cut off the bread which sustained them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}he sent before them a man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Joseph, who was sold as a slave.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}His feet were galled with fetters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he was laid in chains of iron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}till the time that his word came to pass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the word of the {\scaps Lord} that had tried him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The king sent and freed him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the ruler of nations released him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He made him lord of his household,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and ruler of all his possessions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}to admonish his princes at will
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and instruct his elders in wisdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Thus Israel came into Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}His people he made very fruitful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and mightier than their foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He inspired them to hate his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to deal with his servants craftily.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He sent his servant Moses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Aaron whom he had chosen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}portents he wrought in Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and signs in the land of Ham.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Darkness he sent, and it fell:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet they gave no heed to his word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}He turned their waters into blood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 thus causing their fish to die.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Their land was alive with frogs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 swarming even in the royal chambers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}At his command came flies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lice in all their borders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He gave them hail for rain
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fire that flashed through the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}smiting their vines and figs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 breaking the trees of their border.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}At his command came locusts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 young locusts beyond all counting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}which ate every herb in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ate up, too, the fruit of their ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}He struck down in their land all the firstborn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the firstlings of all their strength
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Then forth he led Israel with silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and among his tribes no one was weary.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Egypt was glad when they left,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for terror had fallen upon them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}He spread out a cloud to screen them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fire to give light in the night.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}He sent quails at their entreaty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and heavenly bread in abundance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}He opened the rock; waters gushed:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the desert they ran like a river.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}For he remembered his holy promise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to Abraham his servant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}So he led out his people with joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his elect with a ringing cry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}And he gave them the lands of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the fruit of their toil for possession,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}that so they might keep his statutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and be of his laws observant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 106 \uc1\u8211* The Nation\uc1\u8217*s Sin against the Lord

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 106}Hallelujah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Who can describe his heroic deeds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or publish all his praise?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Happy they who act justly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and do righteousness evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Remember me, {\scaps Lord}, as you remember your people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and visit me with your gracious help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}May I see the good fortune of your elect,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may I share in the joy of your nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in the pride of your heritage.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We, like our fathers, have sinned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 we have done perversely and wickedly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In the land of Egypt our fathers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all heedless of your wonders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and unmindful of your great kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the Red Sea defied the Most High.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But true to his name he saved them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in order to show his might.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they marched through the depths as through desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}saved from the hand of the hostile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 redeemed from the hand of the foe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The waters covered their enemies:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not one of them was left.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So then they believed in his words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and began to sing his praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But soon they forgot his deeds:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they did not wait for his counsel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Their greed was ravenous in the desert;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they put God to the test in the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He gave them the thing they had asked for,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but sent wasting disease among them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The camp grew jealous of Moses
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and of Aaron, holy one of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and covered Abiram\uc1\u8217*s company.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Fire broke out on their company,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 flame kindled upon the wicked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They made a calf in Horeb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and bowed to the molten image.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}They exchanged their glorious God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the image of ox that eats grass.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They forgot the God who had saved them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by mighty deeds in Egypt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Wonders in the land of Ham,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 terrors by the Red Sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So he vowed, and would have destroyed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but for Moses his elect,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who stepped into the breach before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to divert his deadly wrath.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}They spurned the delightsome land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they refused to believe in his word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}They grumbled in their tents,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 would not listen to the voice of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So he swore with uplifted hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to lay them low in the wilderness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}to disperse their seed among heathen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to scatter them over the world.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then they joined them to Baal of Peor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and ate what was offered the dead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}They provoked him to wrath by their deeds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and plague broke out among them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then Phinehas stood between,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and so the plague was stayed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and it was counted to him for righteousness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 unto all generations forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}They angered him at the waters of Meribah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 through them it went ill with Moses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They rebelled against his spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he uttered speech that was rash.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}They did not destroy the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the {\scaps Lord} had commanded them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}but they mingled with the heathen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and learned to do as they did.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Their idol gods they worshipped,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they were ensnared by them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}They sacrificed their sons
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their daughters to the demons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}They poured out innocent blood
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the blood of their sons and daughters
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whom they offered to Canaan\uc1\u8217*s idols,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the land was polluted with blood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}They became unclean by their works,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and adulterous in their deeds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s fury was on his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 filled with horror at his inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}He delivered them to the heathen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to the sway of those who hated them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Their enemies oppressed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and subdued them under their hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Many a time he saved them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but they rebelled at his counsel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and were brought low by their wrongdoing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Yet he looked upon their distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when he heard their cry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}He remembered his covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and, in his great kindness, relented.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}He caused them to be pitied
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by all who carried them captive.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Save us, O {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and gather us out of the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to give thanks to your holy name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to make our boast of your praise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\i {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, the God of Israel,}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i from everlasting to everlasting.}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i And let all the people say \uc1\u8216*Amen.\uc1\u8217*}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 {\i Praise the {\scaps Lord}.}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 Book Five

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 107 \uc1\u8211* The Song of the Redeemed

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 107}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let this be the song of the ransomed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whom the {\scaps Lord} has redeemed from distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}gathering them from all lands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 east, west, north, and south.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In the wastes of the desert some wandered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 finding no way to a city inhabited.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Full of hunger and thirst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their spirit failed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he saved them from their distresses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}guiding them straight on the way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till they reached an inhabited city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let them thank the {\scaps Lord} for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his wonderful deeds for people;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}for the thirsty he satisfies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the hungry he fills with good things.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Some sat in darkness and gloom
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 prisoners in irons and misery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}for rebelling against God\uc1\u8217*s word,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and spurning the Most High\uc1\u8217*s counsel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Their heart was bowed with toil;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 there was no one to help when they stumbled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he saved them from their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Out of darkness and gloom he brought them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and burst their chains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Let them praise the {\scaps Lord} for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his wonderful deeds for people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For he shattered the gates of bronze,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and broke bars of iron.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Some were sick from their wicked ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and suffering because of their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}All manner of food they hated;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they had come to the gates of death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he saved them from their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He sent his word and healed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and delivered their life from the pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Let them praise the {\scaps Lord} for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his wonderful deeds for people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Let them offer to him thankofferings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with joy tell what things he has done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Some crossed the sea in ships,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 doing business in great waters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}They have seen what the {\scaps Lord} can do,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his wonderful deeds on the deep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}At his command rose a tempest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which lifted the waves on high.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Up to heaven they went, down to the depths;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their courage failed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They staggered and reeled like drunkards;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all their skills useless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then they cried to the {\scaps Lord} in their trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he saved them from their distresses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}He stilled the storm to a whisper,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the waves of the sea were hushed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}They were glad, because it was quiet;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they were led to the haven they longed for.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Let them praise the {\scaps Lord}, for his kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his wonderful deeds for people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Where the people assemble, extol him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and praise him in council of elders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He turns streams into a wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 springs of water into thirsty land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}fruitful land into a salt waste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of the sin of the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}A desert he makes pools of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a land of drought into springs of water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}He settles the hungry therein,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they establish a city to live in.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}They sow fields and plant vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which furnish a fruitful yield.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}By his blessing they multiply greatly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he lets not their cattle decrease.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Yet when they are bowed and diminished
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by oppression, misfortune, or sorrow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}he pours contempt upon princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and on trackless wastes leads them astray
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}He lifts the poor out of misery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and makes families fruitful as flocks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}At this sight shall the upright be glad,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all wicked mouths shall be stopped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Let those who are wise observe this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and consider the love of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 108 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Victory

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 108} A song. A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
My heart is steadfast, O God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heart is steadfast.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I would sing, I would make music;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 awake, my soul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Awake, harp and lyre;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would wake the dawn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I would praise you among the peoples, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make music among the nations to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For great to heaven is your love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your faithfulness to the clouds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Be exalted, O God, o\uc1\u8217*er the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your glory o\uc1\u8217*er all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So those you love may be rescued,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 save by your right hand and answer us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}God did solemnly swear:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*As victor will I divide Shechem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 portion out the valley of Succoth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Mine is Gilead, mine is Manasseh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ephraim is my helmet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Judah my sceptre of rule,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Moab the pot that I wash in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on Edom I hurl my sandal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I shout o\uc1\u8217*er Philistia in triumph.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}O to be brought to the fortified city!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O to be led into Edom!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Have you not spurned us, O God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You do not march forth with our armies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Grant us help from the foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for human help is worthless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}With God we shall yet do bravely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he himself will tread down our foes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 109 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Help

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 109} For the leader. Of David, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O God whom I praise, keep not silence;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for their wicked mouths they have opened against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they speak to me with tongues that are false,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}they beset me with words of hatred,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fight without cause against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My love they requite with hostility,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while for them I lift up my prayer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Evil for good they reward me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and hatred for my love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Set over him one who is godless,\uc1\u8217* they say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*an opponent at his right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}From his trial let him come forth guilty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may his prayer be counted as sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Grant that his days may be few,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that his office be seized by another.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Grant that his children be fatherless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and that his wife be a widow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Up and down may his children go begging,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 expelled from their desolate home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}May all that he owns be seized by the creditor
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may strangers plunder the fruits of his toil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*May none extend to him kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or pity his fatherless children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}His descendants be doomed to destruction!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Blotted out be his name in one generation!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May his father\uc1\u8217*s guilt be remembered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his mother\uc1\u8217*s sin not blotted out:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}on record always before the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his memory root from the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}for he gave no thought to show kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but pursued the poor and the needy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 drove the downhearted to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*May the curses he loved light upon him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may the blessings he loathed be afar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Like a garment he clothed him with curses;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may they pierce to his inwards like water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and cling to his bones like oil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Let them be like the robe he wraps round him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the belt he wears every day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Be this the reward of my adversaries,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of those who speak evil against me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But you, {\scaps Lord} my {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be true to your name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 deal kindly with me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your gracious kindness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 save me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For I am poor and needy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my heart is wounded within me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}I am gone like a lengthening shadow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I am shaken off like a locust.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}My knees totter from fasting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my flesh is shrivelled and spare.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}They heap insults upon me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when they see me, they shake their head.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Help me, O {\scaps Lord} my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and save me in your kindness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Teach them that this is your hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your own doing, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Let them curse, if only you bless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Put my assailants to shame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and make your servant glad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}My opponents be clothed with dishonour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and wrapped in a robe of shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I give thanks to you, {\scaps Lord}, with loud voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I give praise in the midst of the throng;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}for he stands by the poor, at his right hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to save them from those who condemn them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 110 \uc1\u8211* A Promise of Victory to the King

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 110} Of David, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
This said the {\scaps Lord} concerning my lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Sit at my right hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till I set your foot on the neck of your foes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}On Zion the {\scaps Lord} is wielding
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your sceptre of might, and charges you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to rule over the foes that surround you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The day that you march to battle
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your people will follow you gladly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 young warriors in holy array,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like dew-drops, born of the morning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} has sworn and will not repent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*As for you, you are priest for ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as Melchizedek was.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}By your side will the {\scaps Lord} shatter kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the day of his wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He will execute judgment
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 filling the valleys with dead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the broad fields with shattered heads.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He will drink of the brook by the way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and march onward with uplifted head.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 111 \uc1\u8211* In Praise of the Divine Goodness

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 111}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will thank the {\scaps Lord} with all my heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the assembled congregation of his people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Great are the things that the {\scaps Lord} has done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 worthy of study by those who love them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Majestic and glorious is his work,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his righteousness abides forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For his marvellous deeds he has won renown;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is gracious and full of compassion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Food he gives to those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 always he remembers his covenant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}His mighty works he has shown to his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in giving to them the nations for heritage.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All that he does is faithful and right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all his behests are firm and sure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They are established for ever and ever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 executed with truth and uprightness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}To his people he sent redemption,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he has appointed his covenant forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His name is holy and awe-inspiring.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The fear of the {\scaps Lord} is the beginning of wisdom
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 those who keep it are wise indeed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 His praise abides for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 112 \uc1\u8211* The Blessings of Godliness

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 112}Hallelujah.Happy are those who fear the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and greatly delight in his commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Mighty on earth shall be their seed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a blessing shall rest on the race of the upright.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Wealth and riches are in their houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their prosperity stands forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}To the upright arises light in the darkness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 full of favour and pity and kindness are they.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It is well with those who show pity and lend,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who support all their affairs upon justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For they will never be shaken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the just will be forever remembered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They will not be afraid of evil tidings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with steady heart they trust the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their heart is firm and unafraid:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they know they will feast their eyes on their enemies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}With lavish hands they give to the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their prosperity stands forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They are lifted to heights of triumph and honour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The sight of them fills the wicked with anger:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 grinding their teeth with despair.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The hopes of the wicked will come to nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 113 \uc1\u8211* The Lord loves the Humble

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 113}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Praise the {\scaps Lord}, you his servants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The name of the {\scaps Lord} be blessed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}From sunrise to sunset
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is the name of the {\scaps Lord} to be praised.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}High is the {\scaps Lord} above all nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 above the heavens is his glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Who is like the {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 seated on high?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He bends down to look
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the heavens and earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He raises the weak from the dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he lifts the poor from the dunghill,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and sets them beside the princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 even the princes of his people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He gives the childless woman a home,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and makes her the happy mother of children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 114 \uc1\u8211* The Marvel of the Exodus

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 114}When Israel went out of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jacob\uc1\u8217*s house from a barbarous people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}God chose Judah for himself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Israel became his kingdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The sea saw it, and fled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jordan river ran backwards.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Mountains skipped like rams,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hills like the young of the flock.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why, sea, do you flee?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Jordan, why run backwards?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Mountains, why skip ram-like?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why, hills, like the young of the flock?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Earth, tremble before the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the presence of Jacob\uc1\u8217*s God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}who turns rocks into pools of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and flint into fountains of water.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 115 \uc1\u8211* Israel\uc1\u8217*s Incomparable God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 115}Not to us, {\scaps Lord}, not to us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but to your name give glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for your kindness\uc1\u8217* and faithfulness\uc1\u8217* sake.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Why should the heathen say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Where is now their God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Our God he is in heaven;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whatever he wishes, he does.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Their idols are silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 made by human hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They have mouths, but cannot speak;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have eyes, but cannot see.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They have ears, but cannot hear;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have noses, but cannot smell.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They have hands, but cannot feel;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have feet, but cannot walk:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no sound comes from their throats.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their makers become like them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so do all who trust in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}O Israel, trust in the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is their help and their shield.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}House of Aaron, trust in the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is their help and their shield.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You who fear the {\scaps Lord}, trust in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he is their help and their shield.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord}, mindful of us, will bless us:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will bless the house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will bless the house of Aaron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He will bless those who fear the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the small and the great together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May the {\scaps Lord} add to your numbers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to you and to your children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Blessed be you of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 creator of heaven and earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The heavens are the heavens of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the earth has he given to people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The dead cannot praise the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor those who go down into silence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But we will bless the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 116 \uc1\u8211* Song of Thanksgiving for Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 116}I love the {\scaps Lord}, for he hears
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my voice, my pleas for mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For he has inclined his ear to me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will call upon him as long as I live.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}About me were snares of death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the anguish of Sheol was upon me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 distress and sorrow were mine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I called on the name of the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I beseech you, O {\scaps Lord}, deliver me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Gracious and just is the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 compassionate is our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} preserves the simple;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I was drooping, he saved me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Be at peace, my heart, once more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the {\scaps Lord} has been good to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You have rescued me from death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my eyes from tears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my feet from stumbling.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Before the {\scaps Lord} I will walk
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the land of the living.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I held fast my faith, though I said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Ah me! I am sore afflicted,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}though in my alarm I said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Everyone is a liar.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}What shall I render the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all his bounty to me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I will lift up the cup of salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and call on the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will pay my vows to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the presence of all his people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Grave in the eyes of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is the death of his loyal and loved ones.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Ah, {\scaps Lord}! I am your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your servant, child of your handmaid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You have loosened my bonds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will offer to you a thank-offering,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and call on the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will pay my vows to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the presence of all his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}in the courts of the house of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the midst of you, O Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 117 \uc1\u8211* A Call to Praise

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 117}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, all you nations:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 laud him, all you peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For his mighty love is over us:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is faithful forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 118 \uc1\u8211* Thanksgiving for Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 118}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let the house of Israel now say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let the house of Aaron now say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let those who fear the {\scaps Lord} now say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Out of straits I called on the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} answered and gave me room.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} is mine; I am fearless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What can mere people do to me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} is mine, as my help:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I shall feast my eyes on my foes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It is better to hide in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than to trust in mortals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It is better to hide in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than to put any trust in princes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Everywhere heathen swarmed round me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the name of the {\scaps Lord} I cut them down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They swarmed, swarmed around me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the name of the {\scaps Lord} I cut them down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}they swarmed around me like bees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they blazed like a fire of thorns:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the name of the {\scaps Lord} I cut them down.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Sore they pushed me, to make me fall;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} gave me his help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} is my strength and my song,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he is become my salvation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Hark! In the tents of the righteous
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 glad cries of victory are ringing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The hand of the {\scaps Lord} has wrought bravely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}the hand of the {\scaps Lord} is exalted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the hand of the {\scaps Lord} has wrought bravely.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I shall not die: nay, I shall live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to declare the works of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Though the {\scaps Lord} has chastened me sore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he has not given me over to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i (The Procession arrives at the Temple)}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Open to me the gates of victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I would enter therein and give thanks to the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 {\i (The Welcome)}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*This is the gate of the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the righteous may enter therein;\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I thank you because you have heard me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and are become my salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The stone which the builders despised
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is become the head-stone of the corner.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}This has been wrought by the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it is marvellous in our eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}This day is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s own creation:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in it let us joy and be glad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}O {\scaps Lord}, save us, we pray,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord}, prosper, we pray.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Blessed the one who enters
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the house of the {\scaps Lord} we bless you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The {\scaps Lord} is God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he has given us light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Wreathe the dance with boughs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till they touch the horns of the altar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You are my God, I will thank you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O my God, I will exalt you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 119 \uc1\u8211* The Power and Comfort of the Word of God

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 119}Happy they whose life is blameless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who walk by the law of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Happy they who keep his charges,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and seek him with all their hearts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}who have done no wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but walk in his ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You yourself have appointed your precepts
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to be kept with diligence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}O to be steadily guided
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the keeping of your statutes!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then unashamed shall I be,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I look towards all your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will thank you with heart unfeigned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when I learn your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will observe your statutes:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O forsake me not utterly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}How can a young person keep their life pure?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 By giving heed to your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}With all my heart have I sought you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let me not stray from your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In my heart have I treasured your word,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to keep from sinning against you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Blessed are you, O {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}With my lips have I rehearsed
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the judgments of your mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I delight in the way of your charges,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 more than in riches of all sorts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will muse upon your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and look to your paths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In your statutes I delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will not forget your word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Grant that your servant may live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will observe your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Open my eyes, that I see
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wondrous things out of your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But a guest am I on the earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hide not your commandments from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My heart is crushed with longing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for your ordinances, at all times.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}You rebuke the proud, the accursed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who wander from your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Roll away from me scorn and contempt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I have observed your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Though princes sit plotting against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your servant will muse on your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Your charges are my delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are my counsellors.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I lie grovelling in the dust;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 revive me, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I told of my ways, you made answer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Grant me insight into your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will muse on your wonders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I am overcome with sorrow;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 raise me up, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Put the way of falsehood from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and graciously grant me your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I have chosen the way of fidelity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your ordinances I long for.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}I hold fast to your charges:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O put me not, {\scaps Lord}, to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}I will run in the way of your commandments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you give me room of heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Teach me, O {\scaps Lord}, the way of your statutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will keep it to the end,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}instruct me to keep your law,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will observe it with all my heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Guide me in the path of your commandments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for therein do I delight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Incline my heart to your charges,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and not to greed of gain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Turn away my eyes from vain sights,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 revive me by your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Confirm to your servant the promise
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which is given to those who fear you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Remove the reproach which I dread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because your judgments are good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Behold, I long for your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Quicken me in your righteousness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Visit me, {\scaps Lord}, with your love
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and salvation, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}So shall I answer my slanderers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for my trust is in your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Snatch not from my mouth the word of truth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for in your judgments I hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}I will keep your law continually,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for ever and evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}So shall I walk in wide spaces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I give my mind to your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}I will speak of your charge before kings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will not be ashamed thereof.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Your commandments are my delight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I love them exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}I will lift up my hands to your commandments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and muse upon your statutes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Remember your word to your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on which you have made me to hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}This is my comfort in trouble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that your word gives life to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}The arrogant utterly scorn me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I have not declined from your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}When I think of your judgments of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord}, I take to me comfort.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}I am seized with glowing anger
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the wicked who forsake your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Your statutes have been to me songs
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the house of my pilgrimage.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}I remember your name in the night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} and observe your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}My lot has been this,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I have kept your precepts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}My portion are you, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have promised to keep your words.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}I entreat you with all my heart;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 grant me your promised favour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}I have thought upon my ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and turned my feet to your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}I hasted and tarried not
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to give heed to your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}Though the godless have wound their cords round me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have not forgotten your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}At midnight I rise to praise you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}With all those who fear you I company,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 aid with those who observe your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}The earth, {\scaps Lord}, is full of your kindness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 teach me your Statutes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}Well have you dealt with your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as you have promised, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}Teach me discretion and knowledge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I have believed your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}Till trouble came I was a wanderer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but now I observe your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}You are good and do good;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}The proud have forged lies against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I keep your precepts with all my heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}Their heart is gross like fat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I delight in your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}It was good for me to be humbled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I should learn your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}The law of your mouth is better to me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than thousands of pieces of silver and gold.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 73}Your hands have made me and fashioned me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make me wise to learn your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 74}Those who fear you shall see me with joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for in your word have I hoped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 75}I know, O {\scaps Lord}, that your judgments are right,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in faithfulness you have afflicted me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 76}Let your love be a comfort to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for so have you promised your servant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 77}Visit me with your quickening pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for your law is my delight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 78}Put the proud to shame, who have wronged me falsely:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will muse on your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 79}Let those turn to me who fear you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that they may learn your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 80}Let my heart be sound in your statutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may not be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 81}My long for you to rescue me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I put my hope in your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 82}My eyes pine away for your promise:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 saying, \uc1\u8216*When will you comfort me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 83}Though shrivelled like wine-skin in smoke,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your statutes I have not forgotten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 84}How few are the days of your servant!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When will you judge those who harass me?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 85}Proud people have dug for me pits
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 people who do not conform to your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 86}All your commandments are trusty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 With falsehood they harass me: help me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 87}They had nearly made an end of me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet I did not forget your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 88}Spare me in your kindness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will observe the charge of your mouth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 89}Forever, O {\scaps Lord}, is your word
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 fixed firmly in the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 90}Your truth endures age after age;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it is established on earth, and it stands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 91}By your appointment they stand this day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all are your servants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 92}Had not your law been my joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in my misery then had I perished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 93}I will never forget your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for through them you have put life in me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 94}I am yours, O save me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I give my mind to your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 95}The wicked lay wait to destroy me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I give heed to your charge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 96}I have seen a limit to all things:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but your commandment is spacious exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 97}O how I love your law!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 All the day long I muse on it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 98}Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for it is mine forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 99}I am prudent above all my teachers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for your charges are my meditation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 100}I have insight more than the aged,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because I observe your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 101}I refrain my foot from all wicked ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may keep your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 102}I turn not aside from your judgments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you yourself are my teacher.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 103}How sweet are your words to my taste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sweeter than honey to my mouth!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 104}Insight I win through your precepts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 therefore every false way I hate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 105}Your word is a lamp to my feet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a light to my path.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 106}I have sworn an oath, and will keep it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to observe your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 107}I am afflicted sorely:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 revive me, O {\scaps Lord}, as you said.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 108}Accept, {\scaps Lord}, my willing praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and teach me your judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 109}My life is in ceaseless peril;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I do not forget your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 110}The wicked set traps for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet I do not stray from your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 111}In your charges are my everlasting inheritance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are the joy of my heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 112}I am resolved to perform your statutes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 forever, to the utmost.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 113}I hate people of divided heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but your law do I love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 114}You are my shelter and shield:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your word do I hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 115}Begone, you wicked people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will keep the commands of my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 116}Uphold me and spare me, as you have promised:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O disappoint me not.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 117}Hold me up, and I shall be saved:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your statutes shall be my unceasing delight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 118}All who swerve from your statutes you spurn:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their cunning is in vain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 119}All the wicked of earth you count as dross,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 therefore I love your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 120}My flesh, for fear of you, shudders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I stand in awe of your judgments.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 121}Justice and right have I practised,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 do not leave me to my oppressors.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 122}Be your servant\uc1\u8217*s surety for good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let not the proud oppress me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 123}My eyes pine for your salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and for your righteous promise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 124}Deal in your love with your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 125}Your servant am I; instruct me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may know your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 126}It is time for the {\scaps Lord} to act:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have violated your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 127}Therefore I love your commandments
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 above gold, above fine gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 128}So by all your precepts I guide me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and every false way I hate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 129}Your decrees are wonderful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 gladly I keep them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 130}When your word is unfolded, light breaks;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it imparts to the simple wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 131}With open mouth I pant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with longing for your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 132}Turn to me with your favour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as is just to those who love you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 133}Steady my steps by your word,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that sin have no power over me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 134}Set me free from those who oppress me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I shall observe your precepts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 135}Shine with your face on your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 136}My eyes run down with rills of water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because your law is not kept.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 137}Righteous are you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and right are your ordinances.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 138}The laws you has ordered are just,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and trusty exceedingly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 139}My jealousy has undone me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that my foes have forgotten your words.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 140}Your word has been tested well;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your servant loves it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 141}I am little and held in contempt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but your precepts I have not forgotten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 142}Just is your justice forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and trusty is your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 143}Stress and strain are upon me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but your commandments are my delight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 144}Right are your charges forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 instruct me that I may live.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 145}With my whole heart I cry; O answer me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I would keep your statutes, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 146}I cry to you: O save me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will observe your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 147}Ere the dawn I cry for your help:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your word do I hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 148}Awake I meet the night-watches,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to muse upon your sayings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 149}Hear my voice in your kindness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord}, by your judgments revive me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 150}Near me are wicked tormentors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who are far from thoughts of your law;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 151}but near, too, are you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all your commandments are trusty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 152}Long have I known from your charges
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you have founded them for all time.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 153}Look on my misery, and rescue me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I do not forget your law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 154}Defend my cause and redeem me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 revive me, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 155}Salvation is far from the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for their mind is not in your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 156}Great is your pity, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Revive me, as you have ordained.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 157}My foes and tormentors are many,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but I have not declined from your charges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 158}I behold the traitors with loathing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they do not observe your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 159}Behold how I love your precepts:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 revive me, O {\scaps Lord}!, in your kindness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 160}The sum of your word is truth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all your laws are just and eternal.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 161}Princes have harassed me wantonly:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but my heart stands in awe of your word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 162}Over your word I rejoice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as one who finds great spoil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 163}Falsehood I hate and abhor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but your law do I love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 164}Seven times a day do I praise you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because of your righteous judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 165}Right well do they fare who love your law:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they go on their way without stumbling.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 166}I hope for your salvation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} I do your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 167}I observe your charges:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I love them greatly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 168}I observe your precepts and charges:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all my ways are before you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 169}Let my cry come before you, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 give me insight, as you have promised.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 170}Let my prayer enter into your presence:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 deliver me, as you have said.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 171}My lips shall be fountains of praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you teach me your statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 172}My tongue shall sing of your word,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all your commandments are right.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 173}Let your hand be ready to help me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for your precepts have been my choice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 174}I long, {\scaps Lord}, for your salvation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your law is my delight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 175}Revive me that I may praise you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and let your precepts help me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 176}I have strayed like a wandering sheep
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 seek your servant, because
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I do not forget your commandments.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 120 \uc1\u8211* Prayer for Deliverance from Slander and Treachery

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 120} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
In distress I cried to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he answered me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Deliver me, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the lip that is false
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the tongue that is crafty.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What shall he give to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you tongue that is crafty?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What yet shall he give to you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Arrows of warrior, sharpened,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with glowing broom coals together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I live by the tents of Kedar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Already too long have I dwelt
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 among those who hate peace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I am for peace:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but when I speak of it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are for war.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 121 \uc1\u8211* The Lord Our Protector

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 121} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will lift up my eyes to the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O whence shall help for me come?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}From the {\scaps Lord} comes help to me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the creator of heaven and earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Your foot he will not let totter:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he who guards you will not sleep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The guardian of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will neither slumber nor sleep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} is he who guards you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your shelter upon your right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The sun by day shall not strike you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the moon by night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}From all evil the {\scaps Lord} will guard you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will guard your life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} will guard your going and coming
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 122 \uc1\u8211* The Joy and the Prayer of the Pilgrims

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 122} A song of ascents. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I was glad when they said to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*We will go to the house of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now we are standing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 within your gates, O Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}O Jerusalem, built close-packed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like a city without breach or gap,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}to you do the tribes come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the tribes of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the law has ordained for Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 there to give thanks to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}There once stood thrones of justice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 even thrones of the household of David.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Pray that all may be well with Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and well with those who love you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}well within your ramparts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and well within your palaces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For the sake of my brethren and friends,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will wish you now prosperity:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}for the sake of the house of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our God, I will seek your good.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 123 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Mercy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 123} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I Lift up my eyes to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who are throned in the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}As the eyes of a servant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 turn to the hand of his master,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 or the eyes of a maid
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the hand of her mistress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so do our eyes turn
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the {\scaps Lord} our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 until he is gracious to us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Be gracious, be gracious to us, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Scorn enough, and more, have we borne
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}More than enough have we borne
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of derision from those at their ease,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of scorn from those who are haughty.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 124 \uc1\u8211* A Magnificent Deliverance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 124} A song of ascents. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Had it not been the {\scaps Lord} who was for us\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let Israel say
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Had it not been the {\scaps Lord} who was for us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when enemies rose against us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}then alive they\uc1\u8217*d have swallowed us up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when their anger was kindled against us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the waters would\uc1\u8217*ve swept us away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the torrent passed over us clean:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}then most sure would\uc1\u8217*ve passed over us clean
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the wild seething waters.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} who has given us not
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to be torn by their teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}We are like a bird just escaped
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the snare of the fowler.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The snare is broken,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and we are escaped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Our help is the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the Creator of heaven and earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 125 \uc1\u8211* A Sure Defence

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 125} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Those who trust in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are like Mount Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that cannot be moved,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but abides forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Round Jerusalem are the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the {\scaps Lord} is round his people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For he will not suffer
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sceptre of wrong
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to rest on the land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 allotted to the righteous;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 else the righteous might put forth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their own hand to evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Do good, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to the true-hearted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But those who swerve
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 into crooked ways
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will the {\scaps Lord} lead away
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the workers of evil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Peace be upon Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 126 \uc1\u8211* Sowing in Tears

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 126} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
When the {\scaps Lord} turned the fortunes of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 we were like dreamers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then was our mouth filled with laughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our tongue with glad shouts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then among the nations they said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} has dealt greatly with them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} had dealt greatly with us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and we were rejoicing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Turn our fortunes, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as the streams in the Negreb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They who sow in tears
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shall reap with glad shouts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Forth they fare, with their burden of seed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and they weep as they go.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But home, home, with glad shouts they shall come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with their arms full of sheaves.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 127 \uc1\u8211* The Need of Heavenly Help

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 127} A song of ascents. Of Solomon.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Unless the {\scaps Lord} builds the house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 those who build it labour in vain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Unless the {\scaps Lord} guards the city,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the watchman wakes in vain.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In vain you rise early,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and finish so late,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and so eat sorrow\uc1\u8217*s bread;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he cares for his loved ones
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in their sleep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Children are a gift of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the fruit of the womb, a reward.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Like arrows wielded by warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are the children of youth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Happy the man who has filled
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his quiver full of them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will not be ashamed when he speaks
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with enemies in the gate.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 128 \uc1\u8211* The Blessings of Home

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 128} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Happy all who fear the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who walk in his ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You will eat what your hands have toiled for,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and be happy and prosperous!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Like a fruitful vine shall your wife be
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the innermost room of your house:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your children, like olive shoots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 round about your table.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}See! This is the blessing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of the man who fears the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} shall bless you from Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You will see Jerusalem nourish
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all the days of your life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You will see your children\uc1\u8217*s children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Peace upon Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 129 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for the Discomfiture of the Enemies of Zion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 129} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8216*Sore have they vexed me from youth\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 thus let Israel say
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Sore have they vexed me from youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but they have not prevailed against me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*The ploughers ploughed on my back,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they made their furrows long.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the {\scaps Lord}, who is righteous, has cut
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the cords of the wicked.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let all who are haters of Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be put to shame and defeated.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}May they be as the grass on the house-top,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which withers before it shoots up;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}which fills not the arms of the reaper,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor the lap of the binder of sheaves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}whereof no one says as they pass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The blessing of God be upon you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 In the name of the {\scaps Lord} we bless you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 130 \uc1\u8211* Out of the Depths

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 130} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Out of the depths
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I call to you, {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Lord}, hear my voice:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 give heed with your ears
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to my loud plea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If you should mark sin, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord}, who could stand?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But with you is forgiveness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you may be feared.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I wait for the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I wait for his word,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I look for the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 more than watchman for morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 than watchman for morning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Israel, hope in the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with the {\scaps Lord} there is love
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with him plenteous redemption.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And he redeems Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from all his iniquities.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 131 \uc1\u8211* As a Little Child

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 131} A song of ascents. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, my heart is not haughty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my eyes are not lofty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I walk not among great things,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 things too wonderful for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Yes, I have soothed and stilled myself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like a young child on his mother\uc1\u8217*s lap;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like a young child am I.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}O Israel, hope in the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from now and for evermore.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 132 \uc1\u8211* The Ancient Promise to David and Zion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 132} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Remember, O {\scaps Lord}, David
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all his sufferings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the oath that he swore to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his vow to the Strong One of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}never to enter his tent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 never to lie on his bed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}never to give his eyes sleep
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or his eyelids slumber,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}till he had found a place for the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the Strong One of Jacob to live in.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We heard of it in Ephrathah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the fields of Jaar we found it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}We went to the place where he dwelt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 we bowed ourselves low at his footstool.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Arise, {\scaps Lord}, and enter your resting-place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you and your mighty ark.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let your priests wear a garment of righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your faithful shout aloud for joy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the sake of David your servant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 do not reject your Anointed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} swore an oath to David
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 an oath that he will not break;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will set on your throne
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a prince of your line.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}If your sons keep my covenant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the statutes I teach them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then their sons, too, forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will sit on your throne.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For the choice of the {\scaps Lord} is Zion;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 she is the home of his heart.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*This is forever my resting-place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 this is the home of my heart.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will royally bless her provision,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and give bread to her poor in abundance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Her priests I will clothe with salvation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 her faithful will shout for joy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}There will I raise up for David
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a dynasty of power.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have set my anointed a lamp
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that shall never go out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Robes of shame I will put on his foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but on his head a glittering crown.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 133 \uc1\u8211* Family together

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 133} A song of ascents. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Behold! How good and how pleasant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is the dwelling of kindred together!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Like precious oil on the head
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that ran down on the beard,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the beard of Aaron, running
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 over the collar of his robe:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}like the dew upon Hermon which falls
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the mountains of Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For there has the {\scaps Lord} ordained blessing \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 life that is endless.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 134 \uc1\u8211* An Evening Invocation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 134} A song of ascents.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Come, praise the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all you the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s servants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who stand by night
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the house of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Lift your hands to the holy place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} who made heaven and earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bless you from Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 135 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Power Revealed in Nature and History

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 135}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Praise the name of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Praise the {\scaps Lord}, you his servants,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}who stand in the house of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the courts of the house of our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, for the {\scaps Lord} is good:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Sing praise to his name it is pleasant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} for himself chose Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Israel as his own special treasure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For I know that the {\scaps Lord} is great,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that our {\scaps Lord} is above all gods.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}All that he wills he does
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the heavens and on the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the seas and in all the abysses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Clouds he brings up from the ends of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 lightnings he makes for the rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wind he brings out of his storehouses.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The firstborn of Egypt he struck,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 both humans and animals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Signs and wonders he sent
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 into your midst, O Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 upon Pharaoh and all his servants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Many nations he struck,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 mighty kings he slew
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Sihon, king of the Amorites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Og, king of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all the kingdoms of Canaan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He gave their land for possession,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 possession to Israel his people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Your name, O {\scaps Lord}, is forever;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your memorial world without end.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For the {\scaps Lord} secures right for his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and takes pity upon his servants.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The idols of heathen are silver
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 made by human hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They have mouths, but cannot speak:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have eyes, but cannot see.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They have ears, but cannot hear:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 there is no breath in their mouths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Their makers become like them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so do all who trust in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}House of Israel, praise the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 house of Araon, praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}House of Levi, praise the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you who fear the {\scaps Lord}, praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Blest be the {\scaps Lord} out of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who lives in Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 136 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Love Revealed in Nature and History

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 136}Give thanks to the {\scaps Lord} for his goodness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Give thanks to the God of gods:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Give thanks to the Lord of lords:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}To him who alone does great wonders:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Whose wisdom created the heavens:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Who spread forth the earth on the waters:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Who made great lights:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The sun to rule over the day:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Moon and stars to rule over the night:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Who struck the firstborn of Egypt:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And brought Israel out from their midst:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}With strong hand and outstretched arm:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Who cut the Red Sea in pieces:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And brought Israel right through the midst:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And shook Pharaoh with all his host into the sea
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Who led his people through the desert:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Who struck down great kings:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And slew noble kings:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Sihon, king of the Amorites:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And Og, king of Bashan:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Who gave their land for possession:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Possession to Israel his servant:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Who remembered our low estate:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And rescued us from our foes:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Who gives to all flesh food:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Give thanks to the God of heaven:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his kindness endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 137 \uc1\u8211* By the Waters of Babylon

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 137}By the waters of Babylon there we sat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and we wept at the thought of Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There on the poplars we hung our harps.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For there our captors called for a song:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 our tormentors, rejoicing, saying:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Sing us one of the songs of Zion.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}How can we sing the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s song
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the foreigner\uc1\u8217*s land?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If I forget you, Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may my right hand wither.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 if I am unmindful of you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or don\uc1\u8217*t set Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 above my chief joy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Remember the Edomites, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the day of Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s fall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when they said, \uc1\u8216*Lay her bare, lay her bare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 right down to her very foundation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Babylon, despoiler,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 happy are those who pay you back
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all you have done to us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Happy are they who seize and dash
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your children against the rocks.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 138 \uc1\u8211* The Constancy of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Care

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 138} Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will thank you, O {\scaps Lord}, with all my heart:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the sight of the gods I will sing your praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and prostrate before your holy temple,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will praise your name for your constant love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you have exulted your promise above all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When I called you, you answered;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you gave me strength, you inspired me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}All the kings of the earth shall praise you, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 when they shall have heard the words you have uttered;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and they shall sing of the ways of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and tell of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s transcendent glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For, high though the {\scaps Lord} is, he looks on the lowly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and strikes down the haughty from far away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Though my way be distressful, yet you preserve me:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you lay your hand on my angry foes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your right hand gives me victory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} will accomplish all that which concerns me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your kindness, O {\scaps Lord}, endures forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O do not abandon the work of your hands.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 139 \uc1\u8211* The Ever-Present God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 139} For the leader. Of David, a psalm.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
O {\scaps Lord}, you search and know me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}when I sit, when I rise you know it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you perceive my thoughts from afar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When I walk, when I lie you sift it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 familiar with all my ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}There is not a word on my tongue,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but see! {\scaps Lord}, you know it all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Behind and before you beset me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 upon me you lay your hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It\uc1\u8217*s too wonderful for me to know
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 too lofty I cannot attain it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Whither shall I go from your spirit?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or whither shall I flee from your face?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}If I climb up to heaven, you are there:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or make Sheol my bed, you are there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If I lift up the wings of the morning
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fly to the end of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}there also your hand would grasp me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your right hand take hold of me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If I say, \uc1\u8216*Let the darkness cover me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and night be the light about me,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The dark is not dark for you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but night is as light as the day.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For you did put me together;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in my mother\uc1\u8217*s womb you did weave me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I give you praise for my fashioning
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so full of awe, so wonderful.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your works are wonderful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You knew me right well;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}my bones were not hidden from you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when I was made in secret,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and woven in the depths of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Your eyes saw all my days:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they stood on your book every one
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 written down, before they were fashioned,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while none of them yet was mine.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But how far, O God, beyond measure
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are your thoughts! How mighty their sum!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Should I count, they are more than the sand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 When I wake, I am still with you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Will you slay the wicked, O God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 And remove from me the bloodthirsty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}who maliciously defy you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and take your name in vain.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Do I not hate those who hate you, {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do I not loathe those who resist you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}With perfect hatred I hate them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I count them my enemies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Search me, O God, know my heart:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 test me, and know my thoughts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and see if guile be in me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lead me in the way everlasting.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 140 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Preservation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 140} To the leader. A Psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Rescue me, {\scaps Lord}, from evil people;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the violent guard me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}from those who plot evil in their heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and stir up war continually:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}who make their tongue as sharp as a serpent\uc1\u8217*s,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and under whose lips is the poison of adders. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Preserve me, O {\scaps Lord}, from the hands of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the violent guard me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from those who are plotting to trip up my feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The proud have hidden a trap for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 cords they have spread as a net for my feet:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 snares they have set at the side of my track. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I have said to the {\scaps Lord}, \uc1\u8216*My God are you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend, {\scaps Lord}, to my loud plea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}O {\scaps Lord} my {\scaps Lord}, my saviour mighty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you did cover my head in the day of battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Grant not, O {\scaps Lord}, the desires of the wicked;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and what they have purposed, promote you not.\uc1\u8217* {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let them not lift up their heads against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 May the mischief they prate bring themselves to destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}may he rain upon them coals of fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may he strike them down swiftly, to rise no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}no place in the land may there be for the slanderer:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may the violent be hunted from sorrow to sorrow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I know that the {\scaps Lord} will do right by the weak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will execute justice for those who are needy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Surely the righteous shall praise your name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and they who are upright shall live in your presence.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 141 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Protection from Persecutors

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 141} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps Lord}, I call to you: hasten, to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend to my voice, when I call to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let my prayer be presented as incense before you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my uplifted hands as the evening meal-offering.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Set, O {\scaps Lord}, a watch on my mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 put a guard on the door of my lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Incline not my heart to an evil matter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to busy myself in deeds of wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in company with workers of evil:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 never may I partake of their dainties.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}A wound or reproof from a good person in kindness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is oil which my head shall never refuse.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In their misfortune my prayer is still with them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Abandoned they are to the hands of their judges:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they shall learn that my words are true.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Like stones on a country road cleft and broken
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so lie our bones scattered for Death to devour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But my eyes are turned towards you, O {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Do not pour out my life, for in you I take refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Keep me safe from the trap they have laid for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the snares of the workers of trouble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Into their own nets let wicked people fall;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while I pass by in safety.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 142 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance from Persecutors

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 142} A maskil of David, while he was in the cave, a prayer.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Loudly I cry to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the {\scaps Lord} plead loudly for mercy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I pour my complaint before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I tell my troubles to him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When my spirit is faint within me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my path is known to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the way I am wont to walk in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have hidden a trap for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I look to the right and the left;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but not a friend have I.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 No place of refuge is left me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not a man to care for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So I cry to you, O {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I say, \uc1\u8216*My refuge are you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all I have in the land of the living.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Attend to my piercing cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for very weak am I.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Save me from those who pursue me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they are too strong for me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Free me from prison,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I may give thanks to your name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the righteous are patiently waiting
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 till you show your bounty to me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 143 \uc1\u8211* A Prayer for Deliverance and Guidance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 143} A psalm of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Listen, O {\scaps Lord}, to my prayer;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 attend to my plea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In your faithfulness give me answer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in your righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}With your servant O enter you not into judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for in your sight can no one alive be justified.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For the enemy persecutes me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 crushing my life to the ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 making me live in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as those who have long been dead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My spirit is faint within me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my heart is bewildered within me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I remember the days of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and brood over all you have done,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 musing on all that your hands have wrought.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I spread out my hands to you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I thirst for you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like parched earth. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Answer me soon, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because my spirit is spent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hide not your face from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 else become I like those who go down to the pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let me learn of your love in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for my trust is in you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Teach me the way I should go:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for my heart longs for you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Save me, O {\scaps Lord}, from my foes:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for to you I have fled for refuge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Teach me to do your will,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you yourself are my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Guide me by your good spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord}, on a way that is smooth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Be true to your name {\scaps Lord}, spare me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bring me out of distress in your faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In your kindness extinguish my enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all those who vex me destroy;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for I am your servant.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 144 \uc1\u8211* The Warrior\uc1\u8217*s Song

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 144} Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
Blest be the {\scaps Lord} my rock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who trains my hands for war,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my fingers for fighting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}My rock and my fortress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my tower, my deliverer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 my shield, behind whom I take refuge,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who lays nations low at my feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Lord}, what are mortals
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you care for them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 humans,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that you think of them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They are like a breath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their days as a shadow that passes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\scaps {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Lord}, bow your heavens and come down:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 touch the hills, so that they smoke.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Flash forth lightning and scatter them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your arrows send forth and confound them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Stretch out your hand from on high;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pluck me out of the mighty waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 out of the hands of foreigners,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}who speak with the mouth of falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lift their right hand to swear lies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}O God, a new song I would sing you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on a ten-stringed harp make you music.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For to kings you give the victory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and David your servant you save.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Snatch me from the cruel sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 rescue me from the hand of foreigners,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who speak with the mouth of falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lift their right hand to swear lies.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Prosperity of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s People

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}May our sons in their youth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be as plants well tended:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 our daughters like cornices
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 carved as in palaces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}May our barns be bursting
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with produce of all kinds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the fields may our sheep bear
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by thousands and ten thousands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May our cattle be fat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 our walls unbreached,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may no cry of distress
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ring in our streets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Happy the people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who fares so well:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and so fares the people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose God is the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 145 \uc1\u8211* The Kingdom Everlasting

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\i }{\cf1\f1\fs22 145} A song of praise. Of David.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
I will exalt you, my God, O king:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will praise your name for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will bless you every day:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will praise your name for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Great is the {\scaps Lord} and worthy all praise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his greatness is unsearchable.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}One age to another shall praise your deeds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 declaring the mighty things you have done.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Of your glorious majesty they shall tell,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will muse of your many wonders.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Of the might of your terrible acts they shall speak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the tale of your great deeds I will tell.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The fame of your abundant goodness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and righteousness they shall pour forth in song.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} is full of grace and pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 patient and rich in loving-kindness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} is good to all the world,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his pity is over all things that he made.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}All your works give you thanks, O {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you are blessed of those who love you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They shall speak of your glorious kingdom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and of your might shall they discourse,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}making known to all his mighty acts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the glorious majesty of his kingdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yours is a kingdom that lives through all ages:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 through all generations extends your dominion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} upholds all who fall;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he lifts up all who are bowed down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The eyes of all look in hope to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you give them their food in due season.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}You yourself open your hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fill with your favour all things that live.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The {\scaps Lord} is righteous in all his ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 gracious is he in all that he does.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The {\scaps Lord} is near to all who call him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to all who call upon him in truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He will fulfil the desires of those who fear him;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will hear their cry for help and save them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} is the keeper of all who love him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but all the wicked will he destroy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}My mouth will utter the praise of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all life will bless his holy name
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 146 \uc1\u8211* The Great Protector

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 146}My soul, praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will praise the {\scaps Lord}, while I live;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will sing to my God, while I am.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Put not your trust in princes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 mortals, in whom is no help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When their breath goes out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they go back to the dust:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on that very day
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their purposes perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Happy those whose help
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 is the God of Jacob:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose hope is set
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the {\scaps Lord} their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}the Creator of heaven and earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sea, and all that is in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He remains eternally loyal.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the wronged he executes justice;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he gives bread to the hungry;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} releases the prisoners.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} gives sight to the blind:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} raises those who are bowed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} loves the righteous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} preserves the stranger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 upholds the widow and orphan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the wicked he leads to disaster.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} shall reign forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your God, O Zion, to all generations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 147 \uc1\u8211* The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Love and Power Revealed in Nature

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 147}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is good to sing praise to our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for praise is sweet and seemly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} builds up Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the outcasts of Israel he gathers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He heals the broken in heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and binds up their wounds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He counts the numberless stars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he gives names to them all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Great is our {\scaps Lord}, rich in power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and measureless is his wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} lifts up the down-trodden,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the wicked he brings to the ground.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Sing songs of thanks to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and play on the lyre to our God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For he covers the sky with clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he prepares rain for the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 makes grass to grow on the mountains.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He gives the cattle their food
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the young ravens when they cry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}His pleasure is not in the strength of the horse,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his joy is not in the speed of a runner;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}but the {\scaps Lord} has his pleasure in those who fear him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in those who wait for his kindness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Praise the {\scaps Lord}, then, O Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sing praise to your God, O Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For he strengthens the bars of your gates,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and blesses your children within you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He brings peace to your borders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and choicest of wheat in abundance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He sends his command to the earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his word runs very swiftly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Snow he gives like wool,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 frost he scatters like ashes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He casts forth his ice like morsels:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who can stand before his cold?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}He sends forth his word, and melts them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his wind blows the waters flow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He declares his word to Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his statutes and judgments to Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}No other nation did he do this for,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they know nothing of his judgments.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 148 \uc1\u8211* The Universal Chorus of Praise

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 148}Praise the {\scaps Lord} from the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise him in the heights.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Praise him, all his angels;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise him, all his hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Praise him, sun and moon;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise him, all stars of light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Praise him, you highest heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you waters above the heavens.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let them praise the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for at his command they were made.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And he fixed them for ever and ever
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 by a law which they dare not transgress.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Praise the {\scaps Lord} from the earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you depths, with your monsters, all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Fire, hail, snow and ice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and stormy wind doing his word.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}All you mountains and hills,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all you fruit trees and cedars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}all you wild beasts and tame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 creeping things, birds on the wing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}All you kings and nations of earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all you princes and judges of earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}young men and maidens together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 old men and children together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Let them praise the name of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his name alone is exalted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Over heaven and earth is his glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He has lifted his people to honour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Wherefore this chorus of praise from his saints,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from Israel, the people who stand in his fellowship.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 149 \uc1\u8211* Song of Victory

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 149}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Sing to the {\scaps Lord} a new song,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sound his praise where the faithful are gathered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let Israel rejoice in its maker,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sons of Zion exult in their king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let them praise his name in the dance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 making music with lyre and with timbrel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For the {\scaps Lord} delights in his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 adorning the humble with victory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let the faithful exult and extol him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with glad ringing cries all night long.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}High praises of God in their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a two-edged sword in their hand:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}on the heathen to execute vengeance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and chastisement sore on the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}binding their kings with chains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their nobles with fetters of iron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}to execute on them the doom that is written.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 This is the glory of all his faithful.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Psalm 150 \uc1\u8211* Hallelujah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 150}Hallelujah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Praise God in his holy place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Praise him in the sky, his stronghold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Praise him for his deeds of power.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Praise him for his boundless greatness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Praise him with blast of horn;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise him with harp and lyre.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Praise him with timbrel and dance;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise him with strings and pipe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Praise him with resounding cymbals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 praise him with clashing cymbals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Let all that has breath praise the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Hallelujah.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Hosea (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Hosea

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message to Hosea son of Beeri during the reigns of Kings Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah of Judah and during the reign of King Jeroboam, son of Joash of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The adultery of Hosea\uc1\u8217*s wife

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the {\scaps Lord} began to speak through Hosea, he said to him:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Go marry an unfaithful woman
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who will bear you children by her adultery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for like an adulterous wife the land is unfaithful to the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So he married Gomer, the daughter of Dibliam, and when she conceived and bore him a son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}the {\scaps Lord} said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Call him \uc1\u8220*Jezreel,\uc1\u8221* for in a little while
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will punish the dynasty of Jehu
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the blood shed at the valley of Jezreel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will cause the kingdom of Israel to cease.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On that day, I will break Israel\uc1\u8217*s bows and arrows
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the valley of Jezreel.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When she conceived again and bore a daughter, the {\scaps Lord} said to Hosea:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Call her Lo-Ruhamah \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*No-Compassion\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for I will no longer have compassion on Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 certainly not spare them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But on Judah I will have compassion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will deliver them by the {\scaps Lord} their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but I will not deliver them by bow nor by sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor by battle nor by horses nor by horsemen.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}After she had weaned No-Compassion, and when she conceived and bore a son, he said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Call him Lo-Ammi \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Not-My-People\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you, Israel, are not my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I indeed am not your God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Yet the number of the Israelites
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will be as the sand of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 which cannot be measured or counted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and where they were told, \uc1\u8216*You are not my people,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will be called, \uc1\u8216*children of the living God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The Judeans and the Israelites
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will join together again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will appoint for themselves one leader,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will return to their own land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Great will be the day of Jezreel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}So call your brothers, My People,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and your sisters, Compassion.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Accuse, accuse your mother:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for she is not my wife,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will not be her husband.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let her put her acts of infidelity out of her sight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and her lovers from between her breasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}else I will strip her bare,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 expose her as she was on the day of her birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 make her like the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let her become like a parched land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and let her die of thirst.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And on her children I will have no pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 since they are children of adultery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for their mother has become a prostitute,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 she who conceived them has behaved shamefully.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 She has said,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will go after my lovers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who gave me my bread and my water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 my wool, my flax, my oil, and my drink.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}That is why I am going to hedge up her ways with thorns,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and build a wall about her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that she cannot find her paths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}She will pursue her lovers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but will not overtake them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 She will seek them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but not find them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In time she will say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will go back to my first husband,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I was better off then than now.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}She herself did not know
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that it was I who gave her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the grain, the sweet wine, and the oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who lavished on her silver and gold \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that they used in worshipping Baal!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9} So I will take back my grain at the harvest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and my sweet wine in its season.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will withdraw my wool and my flax,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 given to cover her nakedness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and so I will strip her naked before her lovers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and no one shall deliver her out of my hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will end all her celebrations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 her yearly feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all her festivals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will lay waste her vines and her fig trees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of which she says, \uc1\u8216*These are my wages
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 which my lovers have given me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make them a thicket,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the wild animals will eat them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In this way I will punish her for the days of the Baals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in which she made offerings to them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and decked herself with earrings and jewels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and went after her lovers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but forgot me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8211* declares the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So I am going to court her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 bring her into the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and speak tenderly to her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will give her from there her vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the valley of Achor as a door of hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There she will respond as in the days of her youth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as in the days when she came up from the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At that time, declares the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you will call me your husband,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and will no more call me your master.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I will remove the name of the Baals from her mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their names never again uttered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}On that day I will make for them a covenant
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with the wild animals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the birds of the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the creatures that crawl on the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will break the bow and the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 banish battle from the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will make them lie down in safety.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I will take you for my wife forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will take you for my wife in righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in justice, in kindness, and in mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I will take you for my wife in faithfulness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and you will know the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On that day I will answer
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8211* declares the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will answer the empty skies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will answer the dry earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The earth will answer with grain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and new wine and oil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will answer Jezreel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and I will plant her in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will have compassion to No-Compassion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will say to Not-My-People, \uc1\u8216*You are my people,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will say, \uc1\u8216*You are my God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Then the {\scaps Lord} said to me, \uc1\u8216*Go again, show love to this woman, who is loved by another, who commits adultery. Love her as the {\scaps Lord} loves the Israelites, though they turn to other gods, and love the raisin cakes offered to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So I redeemed her for fifteen pieces of silver and a homer and a lethek of barley.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And I told her, \uc1\u8216*You must live with me for many days and you must not sleep around or marry another. And I will do the same for you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And like this the Israelites will live for a long time without king and without prince, without sacrifice and without pillar, without ephod and without teraphim.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet afterward the Israelites will return, and seek the {\scaps Lord} their God and their Davidic king, and in the days to come they will turn with awe to the {\scaps Lord} and his goodness.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s case against Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Hear the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message, Israelites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the {\scaps Lord} has brought charges against the inhabitants of the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for there is no fidelity, nor true love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor knowledge of God in the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}but cursing, lying, and murder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 stealing, committing adultery, and deeds of violence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and acts of bloodshed quickly follow each other.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore the land mourns,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all its inhabitants languish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the wild animals and the birds of the skies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 even the fish of the sea are dying.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet let no one bring charges,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let none accuse,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for your people are like those,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who bring charges against a priest{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You stumble by day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the prophet stumbles with you by night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will destroy your mother.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}My people are being destroyed for lack of knowledge;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because you have rejected knowledge
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I reject you from being priest to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Since you have forgotten the teaching of your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I also will forget your children.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The more priests there are, the more they sin against me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will change their dignity to dishonour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They feed on the sin offerings of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so they hunger after their guilt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Thus it comes to be, like people, like priest:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will visit upon each punishment for their ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their deeds I will repay them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They will eat and not be satisfied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will sleep around but stay childless,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because they have abandoned the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to give themselves to{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}prostitution.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Old and new wine take away the understanding.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}My own people ask counsel of a piece of wood!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A stick gives them advice!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For a spirit of prostitution has led them astray,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they commit adultery against their God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On the heights of the mountains they sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and on the hills they burn incense
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 under oaks and poplars and terebinths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for their shade is so pleasant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Therefore your daughters become cult prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will not punish your daughters for committing prostitution,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor your daughters-in-law for adultery.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your men visit prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 sacrifice with cult prostitutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So a people without understanding come to ruin!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Though you commit adultery, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let not Judah become guilty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Do not go to Gilgal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 do not go up to Beth-aven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor swear an oath, \uc1\u8216*As the {\scaps Lord} lives.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Like a wilful heifer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Israel is stubborn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Can the {\scaps Lord} now feed them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as he would a lamb in a broad pasture?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17} Ephraim is wedded to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Leave them alone!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When their drinking is over
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they sleep with the cult prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their rulers love shameful ways.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19} A windstorm will wrap them in its wings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will be ashamed of their sacrifices{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   LXX: altars. }.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The guilt of priests and princes

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Hear this, priests!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Attend, Israelites!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Listen, royal family!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For you is the judgment:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a snare you have become at Mizpeh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and a net spread out on Tabor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the rebels are deep in slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but I will discipline all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3} I know Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Israel is not hidden from me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you, Ephraim, have committed prostitution
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Israel is defiled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Their deeds do not permit them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to return to their God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the spirit of prostitution is within them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they do not know the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Israel\uc1\u8217*s arrogance testifies against them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Israel, even Ephraim, stumble in their sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Judah also stumbles with them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}With their sheep and their cattle
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will go to seek the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but they will not find him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he has withdrawn from them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for they have been untrue to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their children are strangers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their new moon festivals will soon destroy them and their fields.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Blow the trumpet in Gibeah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the clarion in Ramah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Raise the alarm in Beth-aven:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 we are with you, Benjamin!{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   LXX: make Benjamin tremble }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Ephraim will become a desolation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the day of punishment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 concerning the tribes of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I make known what is certain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The princes of Israel have become
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like thieves who move boundary stones.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On them I will pour out my wrath like a flood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim will be oppressed, crushed by judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for they are determined to go after vanity{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   So LXX. Heb. uncertain.  }.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So I am like a moth to Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like rottenness to the house of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For when Ephraim saw their sickness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Israel their wound,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ephraim turned to Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to its patron king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But he cannot heal you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor relieve you of your wound.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For I myself will be like a lion to Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a young lion to the house of Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I, yes I, will rend and go my way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will carry off and none will rescue.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The lack of repentance and reform

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will return to my place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 until in remorse they seek my presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When they are in distress they will quickly seek me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}saying, \uc1\u8216*Come let us return to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he has torn us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but he will heal us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he has injured us
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but he will bandage our wounds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}he will revive in a couple of days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on the third day he will raise us up again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to live in his presence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Let us know, let us eagerly seek to know the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His coming is as sure as the sunrise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will come to us like the winter rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the spring rain that waters the earth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}What can I make of you, Ephraim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What can I make of you, Judah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your love is like a morning cloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the dew which early goes away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}That is why I have hewn them by the prophets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have slain them by the words of my mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My judgment is like the light that goes forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for it is love that I delight in and not sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and knowledge of God and not burnt offerings.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But they after the manner of men have transgressed the covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there they have played me false.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Gilead is a city of evildoers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 tracked with bloody footprints,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and as bandits lie in wait for a man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so a band of priests murder on the way to Shechem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How terrible is the evil they do!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In Bethel I have seen a horrible thing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There Ephraim plays the prostitute,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Israel is defiled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Judah for you also a harvest is set.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When I would restore the fortunes of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}when I would heal Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then Ephrain\uc1\u8217*s guilt is revealed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Samaria\uc1\u8217*s crimes are seen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 how they practise fraud
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the thief enters in,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 while outside bandits plunder.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But it never crosses their minds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that I remember their wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Now their misdeeds surround them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they are always before my face.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Their wickedness amuses the king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their lying gladdens the princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}since they are all of them adulterers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their desire to do evil
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 burns like an oven heated by the baker,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so hot that he need not stir the fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the kneading of the dough, until it rises.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On our king\uc1\u8217*s festival day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the princes are flushed with fever from wine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He stretched forth his hand with the contemptuous{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for like an oven their heart burns with treachery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all night their anger smoulders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the morning it blazes into a flame of fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}All of them glow like an oven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they devour their rulers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All their kings have fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There is none among them who calls to me.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Evidence of the nation\uc1\u8217*s iniquity

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* he lets himself be mixed among the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ephraim \uc1\u8211* he has become a cake unturned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Strangers have devoured his strength, but he does not know it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His hair is sprinkled with grey, but he does not notice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Israel\uc1\u8217*s arrogance testifies against them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet they do not return to the {\scaps Lord} their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and in all this they do not seek him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim is like a simple, silly dove:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to Egypt they call, after Assyria they go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}wherever they turn I will spread my net over them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like birds of the sky I will bring them down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will catch them when I hear them gathering.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Woe to them, for they have strayed from me!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Destruction to them, for they have been untrue to me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Although it was I who redeemed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they speak lies about me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They have never cried to me with their hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but they are always wailing on their beds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They gather to beg for corn and new wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but they turn away from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Although it was I who trained and strengthened their arms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 concerning me they plan only evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They turn away from the Most High{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have become like a bow that swerves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their princes will fall by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because of the insolence of their tongues.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The land of Egypt will mock them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Put the horn to your mouth!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 An eagle swoops down upon the house of the {\scaps Lord}{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because they have transgressed my covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 trespassed against my law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}To me they continually cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*My God, we Israel, we know you!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Israel has spurned that which is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so let the foe pursue him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s rejection of Israel\uc1\u8217*s rulers and idols

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They themselves have made kings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but without my consent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have made princes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but without my knowledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Out of their silver and gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they have made idols to their destruction!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Your calf idol, O Samaria, is distasteful.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My anger is kindled against them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How long will they escape punishment?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Israel made the thing:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a workman made it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is not a god!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Samaria\uc1\u8217*s calf will become mere splinters.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They sow the wind and will reap the whirlwind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A shoot which has no stalk, yields no fruit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If it should yield, strangers would devour it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Israel is devoured.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Already it lies discarded among the nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a worthless pot.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For by themselves they have gone up to Assyria
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a wild donkey which wanders by itself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ephraim pays for love
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but even if they sell themselves among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will round them up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Soon the kings and princes will writhe under the burden of tribute!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For as many altars as Ephraim has erected,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they are to him altars for sinning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}were I to write for him ever so many instructions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they would be regarded as from a stranger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The people love sacrifice, and so they offer sacrifices,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 meat, and so they eat it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 although the {\scaps Lord} is not pleased with them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so now he will remember their guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and punish their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Back to Egypt with them!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For Israel forgot his Maker and built palaces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Judah multiplied fortified cities.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But I will send fire upon her cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and it will devour her strongholds.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The horrors of the coming exile

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Rejoice not too loudly, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you have commited adultery,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 being untrue to your God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You have loved a prostitute\uc1\u8217*s wages
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on every threshing floor.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Threshing floor and wine vat won\uc1\u8217*t feed them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the new wine will fail them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They will not stay in the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but Ephraim will return to Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and in Assyria they will eat what is unclean.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They will not pour out libations of wine to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor please him with their sacrifices.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their bread will be like the bread of mourners:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all who eat it will defile themselves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For their bread will be only for their hunger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it will not come into the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s temple.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}What will you do on the day of the festival?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Or on the day of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s feast?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Even if they flee from destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Egypt will gather them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Memphis will bury them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nettles will take possession of their treasure of silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 thorns will push into their tents.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The days of punishment are come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the days of recompense are at hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as soon the Israelites will know!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The prophet is a fool,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the inspired man is raving mad!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is because of the greatness of your iniquity
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the greatness of your hatred.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim acts the spy with my God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a prophet finds the snares of a fowler are in all his ways.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the house of his God they lay hostile plots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}they commit crimes as in the days of Gibeah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 God will remember their iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will punish their sin.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s corruption

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I found Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like finding grapes in the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I saw your ancestors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like they were the first fruit on a fig tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but as soon as they came to Baal-peor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they consecrated themselves to shamefulness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and became as abominable as the object of their love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* like a bird his glory flies away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There will be no more birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no more motherhood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no more conception.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Even though they bring up their children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will bereave them until not one is left.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Woe to them when I turn away from them!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* planted like Tyre in a meadow{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. LXX: as I have seen, his sons are destined to be a prey },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But Ephraim too must lead forth their children to slaughter.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Give them, {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211* what will you give?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Give them a miscarrying womb and shrivelled up breasts!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All their evil began in Gilgal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there I learned to hate them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because of the evil of their deeds
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will drive them out of my house.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will no longer love them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for all their princes are rebels.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Ephraim is blighted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their root withered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If they do bear children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will slay the darlings of their womb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My God will reject them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because they have not listened to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will become wanderers among the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}A luxuriant vine is Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He bore fruit lavishly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In proportion to the increase of his fruit
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he increased altars to idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In proportion to the beauty of his land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he made beautiful the sacred pillars.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Their heart is false,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 now they must be punished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 God himself will break the necks of their altars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he will destroy their sacred pillars.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yes, soon they will be saying,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*We have no king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for we have not revered the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and a king, what could he do for us anyway?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Speaking words, perjuring themselves, making agreements,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and litigation springs up like a poisonous weed in a ploughed field.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The inhabitants of Samaria will tremble with fear
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for their calf of Beth-aven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Its people will mourn over it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and so will its priests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who had rejoiced for its glory,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 now departed from it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It will be carried off to Assyria
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as a present to the patron king.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Disgrace will Ephraim bear
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Israel will be ashamed of its idol.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As for Samaria, her king will disappear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like foam on the face of the waters.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And the high places of Aven will be destroyed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the shrines of Israel\uc1\u8217*s sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 thorns and thistles will grow on their altars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will say to the mountains, \uc1\u8216*Cover us,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and to the hills, \uc1\u8216*Fall upon us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 What a nation sows, it will reap

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}From the time of Gibeah, Israel has sinned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There they took their stand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Will not war overtake them in Gibeah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because of the wicked?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When I please, I will punish them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nations will gather against them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to chain them for their double crimes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Ephraim indeed was a trained heifer that loved to thresh grain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I myself laid a yoke upon his fair neck{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I made Ephraim draw and Judah must plough,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Jacob must turn the soil for himself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Sow for yourselves righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 reap the fruits of love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Break up your fallow ground,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for it is time to seek the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so righteousness may come to you{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But you have ploughed wickedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 iniquity have you reaped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You have eaten the fruit of lies.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because you have trusted in your own path{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   LXX: chariots },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the multitude of your warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}the alarm of war will sound in your cities
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all your fortresses will be ruined,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as Shalman laid in ruins Beth-arbel in the day of battle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when mothers were dashed to pieces over their children.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Thus will I do to you, Bethel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because of the enormity of your wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When dawn breaks, so will the king of Israel be broken.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s love for his faithless people

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}When Israel was young, then I began to love him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and out of Egypt I called my son.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The more I called them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the further they went away from me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They kept sacrificing to Baals
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and making offerings to idols.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yet it was I who taught Ephraim to walk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 taking them up in my arms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but they did not know that I healed them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}With humane cords I ever drew them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with bands of love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I was to them as one who lifts up the yoke from off their jaws,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and bending toward them, I gave them food to eat.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}No! They return to the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Assyria will be their king,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for they have refused to return to me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Therefore the swords will whirl in their cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will devour in their fortresses{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For my people are bent in rebellion against me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 even if they call on the Most High he will not raise them{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. }.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}How can I give you up, Ephraim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Give you over, Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How am I to give you up as Admah!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Make you like Zeboim!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My heart asserts itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 my sympathies are all aglow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will not carry into effect the fierceness of my anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not turn to destroy Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for God am I, and not man,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 holy in the midst of you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 therefore I will not consume.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They will follow after the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like a lion he will roar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and when he roars
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his children will come trembling from the west.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They will come trembling like the birds from Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like doves from the land of Assyria.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And I will bring them back to their houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8211* declares the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s faithlessness from the first

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Ephraim has encompassed me with falsehood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the house of Israel with deceit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But Judah still wanders with God
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 faithful to the Holy One{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain. Or "Judah is still restless against God" }.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Ephraim herds the wind and hunts the sirocco.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All day long they heap up falsehood and fraud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 make a treaty with Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and sends tribute of olive oil to Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} has a charge to bring against Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to punish Jacob for his acts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 according to his deeds will he requite him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the womb he supplanted his brother,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in manhood he wrestled with God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He wrestled with the angel and prevailed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he wept and sought his blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 At Bethel the {\scaps Lord} found him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and there he spoke with us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the {\scaps Lord} is the God of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is his name!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So now, by the help of your God, return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Keep true love and justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Trust in your God without ceasing.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A merchant uses false scales:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They love to defraud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim says, \uc1\u8216*Yes, I have become rich,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have secured wealth for myself.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But despite my gains
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no one will find a crime I can be convicted of!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I am the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 ever since the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make you again dwell in tents,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as in days of old.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I spoke continually by the prophets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It was I who multiplied visions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and spoke in parables through the prophets.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In Gilead is iniquity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will come to nothing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In Gilgal they sacrifice bulls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so their altars will be as stone heaps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 among the furrows of the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And Jacob fled to the territory of Aram,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Israel worked to earn a wife:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for a wife he herded sheep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} brought Israel up from Egypt by a prophet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and by a prophet Israel was guarded.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Ephraim has given bitter provocation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His Lord will leave upon him his guilt of bloodshed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and for his contempt he will repay him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s final destruction of the guilty nation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}When Ephraim used to speak there was trembling;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a prince was he in Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But he incurred guilt through Baal and died.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And now they go on sinning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They make for themselves molten gods \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 idols of silver, skilfully made,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 wholly the work of smiths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet to such they sacrifice!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And they who sacrifice kiss calf idols{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Heb. uncertain }!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore they shall be like the morning mist,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the dew that early disappears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the chaff which blows away from the threshing floor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the smoke from the window.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet it was I, the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 ever since the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you know no other god but me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor has there been any saviour except me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It was I who shepherded you in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the land of burning heat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When they were pastured
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they became full,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when they were full
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their hearts became proud.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Therefore they forgot me!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So now I will be to them like a lion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a leopard will I lay in wait by the path.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will fall upon them like a bear robbed of her cubs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will tear open their chests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a lion will devour them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and like a wild beast will tear them in pieces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You are destroyed, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 by me, your only helper.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I want to rule you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Where are your princes in your cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 those of whom you demanded,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Give me kings and princes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I give you kings in my anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and take them away in my wrath.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Ephrahn\uc1\u8217*s iniquity is gathered up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his sin is laid by in store.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The pangs of childbirth come upon him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but he is an unwise child.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For this is no time to refuse to leave the womb!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Should I deliver them from the power of Sheol?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Should I redeem them from death?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Death, where are your plagues?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Sheol, where is your pestilence?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Compassion is forever hidden from my eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Though he is flourishing among his brothers{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Or: in the midst of the reeds },
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there will come an east wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 coming up from the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His fountain will dry up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his spring shall be parched.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The wind will strip the treasury,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all the precious things.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Samaria will bear her guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for she has rebelled against her God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will fall by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their children dashed to pieces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their pregnant women ripped open.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Words of exhortation and promise

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Return, Israel, to the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you have stumbled in your iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Take words of repentance with you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and return to the {\scaps Lord} your God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Say to him:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Wholly pardon our iniquity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 accept that which is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 instead of sacrificing bulls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 we offer our praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Assyria will not save us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor Egyptian warhorses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and we will no more call
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the work of our hands our gods.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For in you orphan Israel finds mercy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*I will heal their apostasy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will love them freely,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 now that my anger is turned away from them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I will be as dew to Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will blossom like the lily,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he will plant his roots like the cedars of Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}his saplings will spread out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his beauty will be like that of the olive tree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his fragrance like the cedars of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}People will return and dwell in my shade,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will bring life to new grain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They shall sprout like the vine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their renown will be like that of the wine of Lebanon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Ephraim \uc1\u8211* what have I to do with idols!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is I the {\scaps Lord} who respond to him and look after him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I am like an evergreen cypress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from me is your fruit found.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Whoever is wise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let him discern these things,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 prudent, let him perceive them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s ways are straight,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the righteous walk in them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but the wicked stumble in them.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Joel (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Joel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message that came to Joel, son of Pethuel.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Locust plague and drought

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hear this, elders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pay attention, all inhabitants of the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Has anything like this happened in your days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or in the days of your ancestors?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Recount it to your children;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let your children tell it to their children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their children to the generation that follows.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}That which the cutting locust has left,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the swarming locust has eaten,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that which the swarming locust has left,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the hopping locust has eaten,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and that which the hopping locust has left,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the destroying locust has eaten.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Awake, drunkards, and weep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and wail, all drinkers of wine;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the new wine is cut off from your mouth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For a nation has come up on my land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 powerful, and numberless;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 its teeth are the teeth of a lion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and its jaw-teeth are like those of a lioness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It has laid waste my vines,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and barked my fig tree;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it has peeled and cast it away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bleached are the branches.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Wail as a bride, clad in sack-cloth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the husband of her youth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Cut off are the cereal and drink-offerings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the house of the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in mourning are the priests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who minister at the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s altar.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The fields are blasted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the land is in mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for ruined is the corn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the new wine fails
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the oil is dried up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Be dismayed, farmers;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wail, vine-dressers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the wheat and the barley;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the harvest is lost from the fields.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The vine fails to bear fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the fig tree is drooping;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the pomegranate, palm, and apple,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the trees of the field are dried up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The people\uc1\u8217*s joy withers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Put on sackcloth, and beat your breasts, priests;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 wail, ministers of the altar;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 come, lie all night in sack-cloth, ministers of God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for cereal-offering and drink-offering
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are cut off from the house of your God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Sanctify a fast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 summon an assembly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 into the house of the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 cry to the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Alas for the day!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Near at hand is the day of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and as destruction from the Almighty it comes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Is not food cut off
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from before us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 gladness and joy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the house of our God?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The grains shrivel under their hoes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the storehouses are desolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the barns broken down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the corn is withered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}How the herds of cattle bellow in distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they have no pasture!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The flocks of sheep are forlorn.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}To you, the {\scaps Lord}, I cry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For fire has devoured
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the pastures of the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and flame has scorched
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the trees of the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The wild animals also look up to you longingly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the water-courses are dried up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Blow a horn in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sound an alarm in my holy mountain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let all the inhabitants of the land tremble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the day of the {\scaps Lord} comes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for near is{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the day of darkness and gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the day of cloud and thick darkness!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like the light of dawn scattered over the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a people great and powerful;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 its like has not been from of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 neither will be any more after it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 even to the years of coming ages.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Before them the fire devours,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and behind them a flame burns;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the garden of Eden is the land before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and after them it is a desolate desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nothing escapes them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Their appearance is as the appearance of horses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and like horsemen they charge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Like the sound of chariots on the tops of the mountains they leap,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like the crackle of flames devouring stubble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a mighty people preparing for battle.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Peoples are in anguish before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all faces grow pale.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Like mighty men they run,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like warriors they mount up a wall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they march each by himself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they break not their ranks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}none jostles the other.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They march each in his path.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They fall upon the weapons without breaking.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They scour the city, they run on the wall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They climb up into the houses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Like a thief they enter the windows.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Earth trembles before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sky quakes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the sun and moon become dark,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the stars withdraw their shining;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and the {\scaps Lord} utters his voice before his army,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for his host is exceedingly great.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Mighty is he who performs his word.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For great is the day of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it is terrible, who can endure it?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But now this is the message of the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Turn to me with all your heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with fasting and weeping and mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}rend your hearts and not your garments,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and turn to the {\scaps Lord} your God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he indeed is gracious and merciful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 slow to anger and plenteous in love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and relents of the evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Who knows but he will turn and relent,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and leave a blessing behind him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a cereal and drink-offering for the {\scaps Lord} your God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Blow a horn in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sanctify a fast, summon an assembly,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}gather the people, make holy the congregation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 assemble the elders,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 gather the children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the infants at the breast.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Let the bridegroom come forth from his chamber,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the bride from her bridal tent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Between the porch and the altar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let the priests, the ministers of the {\scaps Lord} weep aloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let them say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Spare, the {\scaps Lord}, your people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Make not your heritage an object of reproach,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the heathen to mock them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why should it be said among the nations, \uc1\u8220*Where is their God?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Future blessings

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then the {\scaps Lord} became deeply concerned for his land, and took pity upon his people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and the {\scaps Lord} answered and said to his people:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will send you corn, wine, and oil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You will be satisfied.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not make you again
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 an object of scorn among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I will remove far from you the northern foe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will drive it into a land barren and desolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 its front into the eastern sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and its rear to the western sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And from it a stench will arise.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He has done great things!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Fear not, land, exult.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Rejoice for the {\scaps Lord} has done great things!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Fear not, animals of the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For the pastures of the wilderness are putting forth new grass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the trees bear their fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 fig tree and vine yield full harvest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Be glad, then, children of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rejoice in the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he has given you the early rain in just measure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and poured down upon you the winter rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and sent the latter rain as before.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The threshing floors will be full of grain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the vats will overflow with new wine and oil.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I will repay you for the years
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which the swarming locust has eaten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The hopping, the destroying, and the cutting locusts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my great army which I sent among you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my people will never again be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}You will eat your food and be satisfied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and praise the name of the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who has dealt so wonderfully by you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and you will know that I am in the midst of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I am the {\scaps Lord} your God and none else,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my people will never again be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Afterwards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will pour out my spirit on everyone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your sons and your daughters will prophesy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your old men will dream dreams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your young men will see visions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and even on your male and female slaves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in those days, I will pour out my spirit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And I will show signs in the sky and on earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Blood and fire and pillars of smoke.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The sun will be turned into darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the moon into blood
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 before the coming of the great and terrible day of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But whoever will call upon the name of the {\scaps Lord} will be saved. For in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be those who escape, even as the {\scaps Lord} has said, and among the fugitives those whom the {\scaps Lord} calls.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}For, in those days and in that time, when I bring back again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will also gather all the nations and bring them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and there I will enter into judgment with them for my people and my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and divided my land.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They have cast lots for my people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have traded boys
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for prostitutes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and sold girls for wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and drunk it.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}What are you to me, Tyre and Sidon and all the districts of Philistia? Were you repaying any deed of mine, or were you doing something for me? Quickly will I return your deed upon your heads.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You who have taken my silver and my gold, and you have brought my goodly jewels into your palaces,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}you have sold the people of Judah and of Jerusalem to the Greeks, so that you might remove them far from their own borders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I am about to stir them up from the place to which you have sold them, and I will turn your deeds upon your own head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of the people of Judah, and they will sell them to the Sabeans, to a nation far off, for the {\scaps Lord} has spoken.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Proclaim this among the nations, sanctify war.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Arouse the warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 let all the fighting men muster and go up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Beat your ploughshares into swords,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your pruning-hooks into lances;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let the weak say, I, indeed, am strong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Bestir yourselves and come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all you nations round about.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Quickly gather yourselves together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ask the {\scaps Lord} to bring his warriors.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Let the nations rouse themselves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for there will I sit to judge
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the surrounding nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Put in the sickle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the harvest is ripe;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 go in, tread,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the wine press is full.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The vats overflow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for great is their wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Noisy multitudes, noisy multitudes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the valley of decision.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For near is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s day in the valley of decision!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Sun and moon have turned dark,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the stars withdrawn their shining.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Whenever the {\scaps Lord} roars from Zion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and utters his voice from Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 earth and sky quake;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but the {\scaps Lord} is a refuge to his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a fortress to the people of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And you will know that I am the {\scaps Lord} your God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I who dwells in Zion, my holy mountain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Jerusalem will be holy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and strangers will not pass through her any more.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}In that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the mountains will drop sweet wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the hills will flow with milk,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all the channels of Judah will flow with water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a fountain will spring from the house of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will water the Valley of Shittim.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Egypt will become a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Edom a wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because of the violence done to the people of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because they shed innocent blood in their land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Judah will remain inhabited forever,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Jerusalem from generation to generation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I will avenge their blood which I have not yet avenged.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} lives in Zion!
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Amos (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Amos

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The message of Amos, one of the sheep breeders of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the reign of King Uzziah of Judah, and in the reign of Jeroboam the son of King Joash of Israel, two years before the earthquake.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Amos said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Whenever the {\scaps Lord} roars from Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and utters his voice from Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the pastures of the shepherds dry up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the top of Carmel becomes arid.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God\uc1\u8217*s Judgment on Israel\uc1\u8217*s Neighbours

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Damascus\uc1\u8217* three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have threshed Gilead
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with threshing instruments of iron.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Therefore I will send fire on Hazael\uc1\u8217*s house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it will devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I will break open the gate of Damascus,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will wipe out those who live in the valley of Aven
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the sceptred ruler of Beth-Eden.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The people of Aram will go into captivity in Kir,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Gaza\uc1\u8217*s three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They carried away captive a whole nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 sold them as slaves to Edom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore I will send fire on the wall of Gaza,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and it shall devour her palaces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And I will wipe out those who live in Ashdod,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the sceptred ruler of Askelon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will turn my hand against Ekron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the remnant of the Philistines will perish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Tyre\uc1\u8217*s three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They carried away captive a whole people into exile in Edom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and did not remember the brotherly covenant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So I will send fire on the walls of Tyre.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It will devour her palaces.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Edom\uc1\u8217*s three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They pursued their relatives with the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 stilled their pity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 cherished their anger continually,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 retained their fury forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So I will send a fire into Teman.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It will destroy the palaces of Bozrah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Ammonites\uc1\u8217* three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have ripped open pregnant women in Gilead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in their lust for land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So I will kindle a fire on the wall of Rabbah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It will destroy her palaces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with a war-cry in the day of battle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Their king will go into exile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he and his nobles together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Moab\uc1\u8217*s three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have burned to lime the bones of the king of Edom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}to desecrate the dead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So I will send a fire into Moab.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It will devour the palaces of Kirioth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with a war-cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with the sound of trumpets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I will kill the ruler,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all his nobles I will slay with him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Judah\uc1\u8217*s three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have rejected the law of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and have not kept his statutes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Instead their false gods their ancestors followed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 have led them astray.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So I will send a fire on Judah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It will devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God\uc1\u8217*s Judgment on Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Israel\uc1\u8217*s three crimes \uc1\u8211* no, four! \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not rescind my judgment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They sell the righteous for money,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the needy for a pair of shoes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They trample on the head of the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 push the humble out of the way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Father and son go to the same temple girl,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and so profane my holy name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They stretch themselves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on garments taken in pledges beside every altar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they drink the wine
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of those who have been fined in the house of their God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It was I who destroyed the Amorites for your sake,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose height was like that of the cedars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as strong as oaks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I destroyed their fruit from above
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their roots from below.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It was I who brought you up from the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 led you forty years in the wilderness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 brought you here to possess the land of the Amorites.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I raised up some of your sons to be prophets
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 some of your youths to be Nazirites.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is not this indeed so, Israelites?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But you made the Nazirites drink wine
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and banned the prophets from prophesying.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Listen!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is I who will make you groan in your places,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as a wagon groans under its load of grain.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then flight will fail the swift,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the strength of the strongest will be useless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The warrior will not save his life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}the archer will not stand firm,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the swift of foot will not escape,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the horseman will not save his life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The bravest of warriors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will flee away naked in that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Warning to Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Listen to this message, Israelites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 which the {\scaps Lord} has spoken against you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 against the whole nation that I brought out of Egypt:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You alone have I cared for of all the nations of the world,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 this is why I will punish you for your crimes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Do two walk together
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 unless they agreed to meet?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Does a lion roar in the forest
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when there is no prey for him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Does a young lion cry out in his den
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 unless he has caught something?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Does a bird swoop down into a trap
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 if no bait is set for it?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Does a trap spring up from the ground
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 if nothing sets it off?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Can a trumpet be blown in a city
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the people not tremble?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Can disaster strike a city
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the {\scaps Lord} not have caused it?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Surely the Lord {\scaps God} does nothing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 without revealing his purpose to his servants the prophets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The lion has roared; who does not fear?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The Lord {\scaps God} has spoken; who will not prophesy?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Proclaim over the palaces in Ashdod,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and over the palaces in the land of Egypt:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Gather upon the mountain of Samaria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and see the violent turmoil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the acts of oppression in her midst.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For they do not know how to do right.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They are heaping up violence
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and oppression in their palaces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore the Lord {\scaps God} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 An enemy will surround the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he will strip your strength from you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and your palaces will be looted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Just as a shepherd rescues from the jaws of a lion
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 two shinbones or a piece of an ear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so the Israelites living in Sameria will be rescued \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with the corner of a couch,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the damask of a divan!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Listen and testify against the house of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the Lord {\scaps God}, the God of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}On the day when I punish Israel for their crimes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will also visit in judgment the altars of Bethel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the horns of the altar will be hacked off,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will fall to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will destroy the winter houses
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 together with the summer houses
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the houses of ivory will perish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Many great houses will be swept away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Listen to this message, women of Sameria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you well-fed cows of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who oppress the poor and crush the needy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who say to your husbands, \uc1\u8216*Bring us another drink!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The Lord {\scaps God} has sworn by his holiness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The time is coming when you will be carried away in baskets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your children carried away in fish-baskets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and through the breaches in the city wall you will go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 thrown out on the garbage dump,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Come to Bethel and transgress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 at Gilgald increase your transgression.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Bring your sacrifices in the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 every third day your tithes!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Burn some leavened bread as a thank-offering,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 proclaim aloud your voluntary offerings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for you love to do this, Israelites!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the Lord {\scaps God}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But it was I who gave to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 empty stomachs in all your cities,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and lack of bread in all your towns,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet you have not returned to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It was I who withheld from you the rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 sending rain on one city,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 while on another I allowed no rain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 One field received rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 while a field without rain withered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}People from two or three cities
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 ranged as far as another city
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for drinking water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and still they did not have enough,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet you did not return to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I struck you with blight and mildew,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I laid waste your gardens and vineyards.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The swarming locust devoured your fig and your olive trees,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet you did not return to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I sent plague among you like the plagues of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I slew your youths with the sword, your horses raided away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I caused the stench of your camps to rise in your nostrils,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet you did not return to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I wrought a destruction among you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You were like a stick snatched from the fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet you did not return to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore this is what I will do to you, Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and because I am about to do this to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 prepare to meet your God, Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He is here!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He who forms the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 creates the wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 declares to his thoughts to mortals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 makes dawn and darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 treads upon the heights of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts, is his name!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Funeral Song for Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Listen to the words of the funeral song
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I am singing for you, Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Fallen, no more to rise, is the virgin Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Hurled down upon her own soil she lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with no one to lift her up!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For the Lord {\scaps God} says this:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The city that marches out with a thousand soldiers
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 has only a hundred left,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the one that marches out with a hundred
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 has only ten left.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For the {\scaps Lord} says this to Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Seek me and live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But do not seek Bethel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 do not enter Gilgal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 do not go over to Beer-sheba.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For Gilgal will enter exile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Bethel will go to destruction.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Seek the {\scaps Lord} and live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 or he will cast fire on the house of Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and it will devour
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and there will be no one to quench it for Bethel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You who turn judgment to bitter wormwood,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and cast righteousness into the dirt:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He who made the Pleiades and Orion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who turns deep darkness into dawn,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who darkens day again into night,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who summons the waters of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and pours them out on the earth\uc1\u8217*s surface,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is his name!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He causes destruction to burst over the strong.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He brings devastation on the fortress.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You who hate the arbiters at the city gate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and abhor anyone who speaks the truth:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Because you trample on the weak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and tax their grain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 although you have built houses of hewn stone,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you will not live in them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 although you have planted charming vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you will not drink their wine.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For I know how many are your crimes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and how great are your sins!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You persecutors of the righteous, takers of bribes!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You deny the poor their justice at the city gate.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It would be wise to keep quiet in such an evil time.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Seek good and not evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 that you may live,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so the {\scaps Lord}, God of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may be with you, as you have claimed he is.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Hate evil and love good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 establish justice at the city gate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Perhaps the {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will be gracious to a surviving remnant of Joseph.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore the {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts, says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In all the public squares there will be wailing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in every street the sound of mourning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will summon the farmers to mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and professional mourners to wailing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In all vineyards there will be lamenting,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when I pass through your midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Fools who long for the day of the {\scaps Lord}!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What does the day of the {\scaps Lord} mean to you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It is darkness, and not light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}It is as when one flees from a lion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and is attacked by a bear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as when one reaches home, leans his hand on the wall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and a snake bites him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Won\uc1\u8217*t the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s day be darkness and not light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 murky darkness without a ray of light in it?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I hate, I despise your feasts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not smell the savour of your festivals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I will not be pleased with your burnt offerings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your grain offerings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not accept the peace offerings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of your fattened calves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Spare me the noise of your songs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will not listen to the melody of your lyres.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But let justice roll on as a flood of waters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and righteousness like an unfailing stream.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Was it only sacrifices and grain offerings
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you brought me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 during the forty years in the wilderness, Israel?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But now you will lift up your "king" Sikkuth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and "star god" Kiyyun,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your idols which you have made for yourselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}as I drive you into exile beyond Damascus,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}, whose name is the God of hosts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Destruction of Israel

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Sorrow awaits who are carefree in Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 overconfident on the mountain of Samaria!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The elite of this, the best of nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on whom the people of Israel rest their hopes!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You say to the people:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Cross over to Calneh and see,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 go from there to Hamath the great,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then go down to Gath of the Philistines:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Are they better than these kingdoms?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is their territory larger than yours?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You push away all thoughts of the evil day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 yet have instituted a rule of violence.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They lie on ivory couches,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 sprawl on their divans,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 eat choice lambs from the flock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and fattened calves from the stall.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They idly sing to the sound of the lyre,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 thinking themselves songwriters like David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}they drink bowlfuls of wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and anoint themselves with the finest of oil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But they do not grieve over the ruin of Joseph.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore now they must go into exile
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 at the head of the captives,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and hushed will be the revelry of the sprawlers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The Lord {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts, has sworn by himself:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I abhor the pride of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I hate his palaces,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 therefore I will deliver up the city
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all that is in it to their enemies.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If ten people remain in one house, then they will die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When the uncle and another member of the family of a dead man come to carry the body out of the house for burial, they will call to someone in a corner of the house, \uc1\u8220*Any more there?\uc1\u8221* and he will answer, \uc1\u8220*No\uc1\u8221*, and then he will add, \uc1\u8220*Be quiet!\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* for the name of the {\scaps Lord} must not be mentioned.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Look! The {\scaps Lord} is giving the command!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will smash the large house to bits,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the small house into fragments.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Do horses gallop on crags?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Does one plough the sea with oxen?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet you turn justice into poison weed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the fruit of righteousness into bitter wormwood.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You who are so proud
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of capturing Lo-debar,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who say, \uc1\u8220*Have we not by our own strength
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 taken Karnaim for ourselves?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am now raising up against you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Israel, a nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}, the God of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will oppress you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the entrance of Hamath
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to the brook of the Arabah.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Vision of Locusts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}This is what the Lord {\scaps God} showed me: he was forming a swarm of locusts, when the late spring grass began to come up after the king\uc1\u8217*s share had been harvested.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And when they had finished devouring all the land\uc1\u8217*s vegetation, I said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Lord {\scaps God}, forgive, I beg you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How can Jacob survive,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he is so helpless?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} relented. This will not happen,\uc1\u8217* said the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Vision of Fire

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4} This is what he showed me: the Lord {\scaps God} was giving command to execute judgment by fire. It burned up the great deep, and had begun to devour the fields, and I said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Lord {\scaps God}, forgive, I beg you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How can Jacob survive,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he is so helpless?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6} The {\scaps Lord} relented. \uc1\u8216*This will not happen either,\uc1\u8217* said the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Vision of a Plumb Line

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7} This is what the Lord {\scaps God} showed me: the Lord was standing beside a wall built with a plumb line, with a plumb line in his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And the {\scaps Lord} said to me,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*What do you see, Amos?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 And I answered,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*A plumb line,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 Then the Lord said,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Watch: I am setting a plumb line
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the midst of my people Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will no longer overlook their crookedness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And the high places of Isaac
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will be desolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the sanctuaries of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will be laid waste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will rise up against the house of Jeroboam
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with the sword.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Amaziah and Amos

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Amaziah, chief priest of Bethel sent this message to King Jeroboam of Israel: \uc1\u8216*Amos has conspired against you right in the heart of Israel. The country cannot survive all his words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Amos has said, \uc1\u8220*Jeroboam will die by the sword, and Israel will be led away captive out of their land.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And Amaziah said to Amos, \uc1\u8216*Leave, you who see visions, go to the land of Judah. Earn your bread there and prophesy there,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}but don\uc1\u8217*t prophesy any more at Bethel, for it is the king\uc1\u8217*s sanctuary, and it is the royal residence.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*I am no prophet,\uc1\u8217* Amos answered Amaziah, \uc1\u8216*nor trained as one.  I am a shepherd and a keeper of sycamores fig trees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But the {\scaps Lord} took me away from following the flock, and the {\scaps Lord} said to me, \uc1\u8220*Go, prophesy to my people Israel.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now therefore listen to the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You say not to prophesy against Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor to preach against the house of Isaac.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your wife will become a prostitute in the city,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your sons and your daughters will fall by the sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your land will be divided up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you will die on unclean soil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Israel will be led away captive out of their land.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Time is Ripe

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}The Lord {\scaps God} showed me this: a basket of summer fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*What do you see, Amos?\uc1\u8217* he asked. I replied, \uc1\u8216*A basket of ripe summer fruit.\uc1\u8217* Then the {\scaps Lord} said to me:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The time is ripe for my people Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will no longer overlook their crimes.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The singing women in the palace will howl on that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Corpses everywhere,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 thrown out in silence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Listen to this, you who trample on the needy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who oppress the poor of the earth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}saying:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 When will the feast of the new moon be over
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that we may sell grain?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the sabbath ended
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that we may offer wheat for sale?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Reducing the measure and increasing the price,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 cheating with false scales,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}mixing the sweepings in with the wheat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Then we can buy the poor for money,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the needy for a pair of shoes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now the {\scaps Lord} has taken an oath
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 by the Pride of Jacob:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will never forget all their deeds!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Because of this won\uc1\u8217*t the land quake,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all its inhabitants mourn?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Won\uc1\u8217*t the whole of it rise like the Nile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 churn and subside like the Nile in Egypt?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On that day, says the Lord {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make the sun set at noon
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and darken the earth in broad daylight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I will turn your feasts into mourning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all your songs into dirges.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will cause you to dress in sackcloth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 every head shaved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make you mourn like you have lost your only son,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all that happens will end in bitterness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The day is coming, says the Lord {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when I will send hunger in the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not a famine of bread or thirst for water,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but for hearing the message of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then they will wander from sea to sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the north to the east,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to seek a message from the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but they will not find it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In that day beautiful girls and strong young men
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will faint from thirst.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Those who take oaths by the shameful idol of Samaria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who swear, \uc1\u8220*As surely as your God lives, O Dan!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and, \uc1\u8220*By the sacred way to Beer-sheba!\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will fall and never rise again.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9} I saw the Lord towering above the altar, and he commanded:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Strike the tops of the pillars
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that the foundations may shake,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 bring them down on the heads of the people below.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The rest of them I will slay with the sword:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no one will get away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no one will escape.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If they dig down to Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there will my hand take them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If they climb up to the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from there will I bring them down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If they hide themselves on the top of Carmel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there will I search them out and take them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If they hide out of my sight at the bottom of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there will I command the sea serpent to bite them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}If they are taken into captivity by their enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 there will I command the sword to slay them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will keep my eye on them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but for evil and not for good.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It is the Lord the {\scaps God} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who touches the earth and it trembles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all who live on it mourn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The earth rises up like the Nile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and sinks like the Nile of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The one who builds in the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who sets the dome of the sky over the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who summons the waters of the sea
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and pours them out on the face of the earth:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is his name.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To me, Israelites, you are
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 just like the Cushites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the  {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yes, I brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but also the Philistines from Caphtor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the Arameans from Kir!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Behold the eyes of the Lord {\scaps God}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 are on the sinful kingdom:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will destroy it from the face of the earth!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But I will not completely destroy the house of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For behold I am about to give the command,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will shake the house of Israel among all the nations
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 just as one shakes grain in a sieve,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but not a pebble shall fall to the ground.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}All the sinners of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who deny that disaster will touch or befall them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 will die by the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Promise of Restoration

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On that day I will raise up the fallen house of David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will wall up its gaps and raise up its ruins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will rebuild it as it was long ago.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They will possess again the rest of Edom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all the nations which once you ruled for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}, who will do this.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Listen! The days are coming, says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when the harvest is too big to reap
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 before it is time to plough,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when the grapes cannot be all trod
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 before it is time to sow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when the mountains will run with sweet wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and every hill will flow with it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will bring back my people Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will rebuild waste cities and inhabit them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 plant vineyards and drink their wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 make gardens and eat their fruit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will plant them on their own soil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will never again be uprooted from their land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 which I have given them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord} your God.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Obadiah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Obadiah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The vision of Obadiah; what the {\scaps Lord} said about Edom:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 We have heard a report from the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a messenger has been sent among the nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Rise up, let us rise against Edom in battle!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will make you small among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and despised by all!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Your proud heart has misled you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you who live in the clefts of the rock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you who build on high your dwelling.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You say to yourselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Who can bring me down to earth?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Though you build high as the eagle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 though between the stars you set your nest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from there will I bring you down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If thieves had come to you, marauders by night
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 would they not have stolen only as much as they needed?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If grape-gatherers had come to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 would they not have left some gleanings?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Descendents of Esau,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all your treasures are looted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To your border they have driven you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all your allies have betrayed you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your avowed friends have overpowered you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have set a trap for you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Where is your wisdom now?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will destroy the wise of Edom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 drive wisdom out of Mount Esau.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Your warriors will be filled with terror, Teman,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 none will be left alive on Mount Esau.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Because of the violence done to your relatives, the people of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shame covers you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you are cut off forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In the day when you stood aloof,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day when strangers carried away their wealth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and strangers entered into their gates,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and over Jerusalem cast lots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you were as one of those strangers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}You should not have gloated over your relatives,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of their misfortune.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You should not have exulted over the land of Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of their destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You should not have laughed loudly
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at their distress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You should not have entered in at the gate of my people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of their disaster.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You should not have gloated over their calamity,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of their disaster,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor stretched out your hand after their wealth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of their disaster,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}nor stood at the crossroads
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to cut down their fugitives,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor should you have betrayed their refugees
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the day of distress.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Near at hand is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s day for all the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 As you have done so will it be done to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your deeds will come back on your own head.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}As you have drunk upon my holy mountain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so all the nations will drink in turn;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will drink deep
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and be as though they had not been.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But on Mount Zion some will escape,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it will be again holy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and those of the house of Jacob
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will again enter into their possessions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For the house of Jacob will be a fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the house of Joseph a flame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but the house of Esau will become stubble.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They will kindle and devour it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Not even one of the house of Esau will escape,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for the {\scaps Lord} has spoken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They will possess the Negeb and Mount Esau,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Shephelah of the Philistines.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will possess the territory of Ephraim and Samaria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Benjamin will possess Gilead.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The exiles of Israel will possess the land of the Canaanites
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as far as Zarephath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The captives of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will possess the cities of the Negreb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The rescued will come up on Mount Zion to rule Mount Esau,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the kingdom will belong to the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Jonah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Jonah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jonah runs away

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}This message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Jonah, the son of Amittai:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Arise, go to that great city, Nineveh, and preach against it; for their wickedness is known to me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Jonah started to flee to Tarshish from the presence of the {\scaps Lord}. He went down to Joppa and found a ship going to Tarshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the {\scaps Lord} made a furious wind blow over the sea, and there was such a great storm that the ship was in danger of breaking to pieces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The sailors were terrified and each cried for help to his own god. They threw the ship\uc1\u8217*s cargo into the sea to make the ship lighter. Meanwhile Jonah had gone down into the bottom of the ship and lay fast asleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The captain of the ship went and said to him, \uc1\u8216*How can you sleep? Call on your god; perhaps that god will think of us, so that we may not be lost.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The sailors said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Come, let us cast lots to discover on whose account this evil has come upon us.\uc1\u8217* So they cast lots, and the lot indicated Jonah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So they said to him, \uc1\u8216*Are you to blame for this? Tell us, what is your business, and where do you come from? What is your country and to what people do you belong?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He replied, \uc1\u8216*I am a Hebrew, and a worshipper of the {\scaps Lord}, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the men were greatly frightened and said to him, \uc1\u8216*What have you done?\uc1\u8217* For they knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the {\scaps Lord}, because he had told them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then they said to him, \uc1\u8216*What should we do to you, to make the sea calm for us?\uc1\u8217* For the sea grew more and more stormy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He said to them, \uc1\u8216*Take me up and throw me into the sea, and the sea will be calm for you, for I know that it is because of me this fierce storm has overtaken you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But instead the men rowed hard to get back to the land; they could not, however, for the sea grew more and more stormy ahead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So they cried to the {\scaps Lord} and said, \uc1\u8216*We beg you, {\scaps Lord}, we beg you, don\uc1\u8217*t let us die for this man\uc1\u8217*s life, and don\uc1\u8217*t let us be guilty of shedding innocent blood, for you are the {\scaps Lord}; you have done as it pleases you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And they took up Jonah, and threw him into the sea; and the sea became calm.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then the men greatly feared the {\scaps Lord}, and they offered a sacrifice and made vows to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the {\scaps Lord} arranged for a great fish to swallow Jonah, and Jonah was inside the fish three days and three nights.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jonah\uc1\u8217*s song

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Jonah prayed to the {\scaps Lord} his God, out of the belly of the fish,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I cried out of my distress, to the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he answered me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 out of the midst of Sheol I cried aloud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you heard my voice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For you cast me into the deep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 into heart of the seas,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the great flood rolled about me;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all your breakers and your waves
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 passed over me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I said, I am driven out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 away from your sight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How will I ever again
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 look towards your holy temple?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The waters surrounded me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the great deep engulfed me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sea weeds were wrapped about my head.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I went down to the roots of the mountains;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the prison of the earth closed over me forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet you brought up my life from destruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 O {\scaps Lord} my God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As my life slipped away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I remembered the {\scaps Lord};
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and my prayer reached you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in your holy temple.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Those who worship worthless idols
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 abandon their own mercy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but I will sacrifice to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with loud thanksgiving!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will pay that which I have vowed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Salvation is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And the {\scaps Lord} spoke to the fish, and it threw up Jonah upon the dry land.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The message to Nineveh

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}This message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Jonah the second time,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Arise, go to that great city, Nineveh, and proclaim to it the message that I tell you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Jonah started for Nineveh, as the {\scaps Lord} commanded. Now Nineveh was so large a city that it took three days\uc1\u8217* journey to cross it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Jonah began by going a day\uc1\u8217*s journey into the city, and he proclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Forty days more and Nineveh shall be overthrown.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the people of Nineveh believed God; and they ordered a fast and put on sackcloth, from the greatest to the least of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And when word came to the king of Nineveh, he rose from his throne, took off his robe, dressed in sackcloth, and sat in ashes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And he made this proclamation and published it in Nineveh: \uc1\u8216*By the decree of the king and his nobles: People, beast, herd, and flock shall not taste anything; let them not eat nor drink water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let both people and animals put on sackcloth and let them cry earnestly to God; let them each turn from their evil ways and from the deeds of violence which they are doing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Who knows? God may relent and avert his fierce anger, so that we may not die.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When God saw that they turned from their evil course, he relented the evil which he said he would do to them, and did not do it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jonah sulks

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}But this seemed very wrong to Jonah and he became angry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He prayed to the {\scaps Lord} and said, \uc1\u8216*Ah, {\scaps Lord}, wasn\uc1\u8217*t this what I said when I was still in my own country? That was why I fled at once to Tarshish; for I knew that you are a gracious and merciful God, patient, and loving and ready to forgive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore, {\scaps Lord}, I beg you, take my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8216*Are you doing right in being angry?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jonah went out of the city and sat down on the east side, and there made a hut for himself and sat under it, waiting to see what would become of the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the {\scaps Lord} arranged for a bush to grow up over Jonah as a shade for his head to make him comfortable. The bush gave Jonah great pleasure;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but at dawn the next day God arranged for a worm which attacked the bush, so that it wilted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And when the sun rose, God arranged a hot east wind. And the sun beat upon Jonah\uc1\u8217*s head, so that he was faint and begged that he might die, saying, \uc1\u8216*It is better for me to die than to live.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But God said to Jonah, \uc1\u8216*Are you doing right in being angry about the bush?\uc1\u8217* He replied, \uc1\u8216*I have every right to be as angry as I could possibly be!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jonah is rebuked

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8216*You care about a bush which has cost you no trouble and which you have not made grow, which came up in a night and wilted in a night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Should I not care for the great city Nineveh, in which there are one hundred and twenty thousand people who do not know their right hand from their left; and many cattle too?\uc1\u8217*
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Micah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Micah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Superscription to Micah\uc1\u8217*s Sermons

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message which came to Micah of Morsheth in the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. The visions he saw about Samaria and Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Judgment on Guilty Samaria and Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Listen, all you peoples!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the earth!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the Lord {\scaps God} will be a witness against you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the Lord from his holy temple!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} is coming from his holy place,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he descends and treads on the heights of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}so that the mountains melt beneath
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like wax in the presence of the fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the valleys break apart
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like water poured down a steep descent.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}All this is because of the crime of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and for the sin of the house of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What was the crime of Jacob?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Was it not Samaria?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What is the sin of Judah?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is it not Jerusalem?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*I will make Samaria a ruin in an open field,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and a place where a vineyard is planted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will hurl down her stones into the valley,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and lay bare her foundations.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*All her images will be shattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all her statues will be burned with fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all her idols I will lay in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they were acquired by prostitution,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and to prostitution they will return.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This is why I will mourn and wail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will go barefoot and naked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will howl like the jackals
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and mourn like the desert owl.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For the blow that Samaria has received is incurable.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It has spread over Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it extends even to the gate of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 even to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Don\uc1\u8217*t tell this in Gath!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Don\uc1\u8217*t even cry \uc1\u8211* but sit in the dust at Beth-leaphrah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Pass by, inhabitants of Shaphir, naked and ashamed!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The inhabitants of Zaanan cannot leave their city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Beth-ezel laments and removes its support from you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The inhabitants of Maroth wait anxiously for good!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But the {\scaps Lord} has sent disaster to the gates of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Harness the horse to the chariot, inhabitants of Lachish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You led the daughter of Zion, Jerusalem, into sin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in you are found the crimes of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore you must give parting gifts to Moresheth-gath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Beth-achzib will betray the kings of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I will hand you to a conqueror, people of Mareshah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the leaders of Israel will hide in Adullam Cave!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Shave your head in morning for the children you love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 until you are bald as vultures, because they have left you for exile.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Oppression of the Poor

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Woe to those who lie awake planning evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who in the light of morning carry out their plan
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because they have the power to do it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They covet fields and seize them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 desire houses and take them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they crush householder and his household,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 people and their possessions.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore the {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I am planning disaster from which you cannot save your neck,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 nor walk proudly because it will be a terrible time.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On that day they will sing a taunt-song to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 this mocking lament:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*My people\uc1\u8217*s estate is being measured for sale,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 our captors are dividing our fields.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 We are completely undone.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}There will be no one to measure out land for you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s community.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*\uc1\u8220*Don\uc1\u8217*t rant!\uc1\u8221* they urge, \uc1\u8220*Of such things one does not prophesy!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shame will not overtake us!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Is the {\scaps Lord} impatient, or are such things his deeds?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Are not his words favourable to the family of Jacob?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Aren\uc1\u8217*t my commands good for those who obey them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But you, you stand up as a foe against those who are peaceful;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you strip the robe from those who pass by quietly, averse to conflict.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Women of my people you drive out from their happy homes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from their young children you take away my glory forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Rise and begone, for this is no place to rest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your uncleanness brings destruction, severe destruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If a person walking in wine and falsehood were to say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will prophesy to you of wine and strong drink,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then he would be the perfect prophet for this people!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord Leading Back His Scattered People

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*I will assuredly assemble all of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will surely gather the survivors of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will herd them together as sheep in a fold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a flock in the pasture,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the land will resound with the sounds of multitudes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*The one who breaks out goes first.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have broken forth and passed by the gate
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and through it have they gone out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their king leads before them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} at their head.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Crimes of Judah\uc1\u8217*s Civil and Spiritual Leaders

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}I also said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Listen now, leaders of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 judges of the house of Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is it not your duty to know what is the right?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Haters of that which is good and lovers of evil!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*They devour the flesh of my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their hide they strip from off them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and break in pieces and serve up their bones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like meat in a pot or the cooking pan!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Then they will cry out to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but he will not pay attention to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will hide his face from them at that time
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because they have committed such crimes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore the {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*To the prophets who lead my people astray,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who when they have food between their teeth declare peace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but against one who puts nothing in their mouths,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they proclaim an open war!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Night will overtake you so that you have no vision,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and darkness so that there will be no divination,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the sun will go down on the prophets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the day shall be dark over them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*The seers will be ashamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the diviners will turn pale,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 all of them will cover their mouths.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For there will be no answer from God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*But I, on the contrary am full of power,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the sense of justice and strength,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to make known to Jacob his crime,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and to Israel his sin.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Hear this, leaders of the house of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 judges of the house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you who spurn justice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and make all that is straight crooked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}who build Zion with acts of bloodshed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Jerusalem with crime.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*The leaders render judgment for a bribe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and her priests give oracles for a reward,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and her prophets divine for silver.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet they claim to rely on the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8221*, they say, \uc1\u8220*is in our midst.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Evil cannot overtake us.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Therefore for your sakes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Zion will be plowed as a field,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Jerusalem will become a heap of ruins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the temple mount a wooded height.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Peace and Worldwide Renown of Zion

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}In the days to come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the mountain of the {\scaps Lord} will be established,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the house of our God on the top of the mountain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 lifted above the hills.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All the nations will flow to it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and many peoples will go and say,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Come, let us go up to the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s mount,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to the house of the God of Jacob,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that he may instruct us in his ways,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that we may walk in his paths.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For from Zion proceeds instruction
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s word from Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He will arbitrate between many peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and render decisions for numerous nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will beat their swords into ploughshares,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their spears into pruning hooks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nation will not lift up sword against nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will learn war no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They will live each under his vine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and under his fig tree, with none to terrify them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the mouth of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has spoken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Each nation trusts in the names of their gods,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but we will worship the {\scaps Lord} our God forever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*On that day,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will assemble the lame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will gather exiles I punished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will restore the lame as a remnant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the exiles into a great nation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} will rule over them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on Mount Zion from that time forever.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But you, watchtower for the flock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 hill of the daughter of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to you will return your former rule.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So why do you now cry aloud? Haven\uc1\u8217*t you any king?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Or has your counsellor perished, so you writhe in pain like a woman in labour?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Writhe and scream, daughter of Zion, like a woman in labour!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For now you must leave the city and camp in the open field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You will be taken to Babylon, but there will be rescued.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There the {\scaps Lord} will save you from the hands of your foes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But now many nations gather against you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They say, \uc1\u8216*Let her be defiled, we will gloat over Zion.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But they do not know the thoughts of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They do not understand his plan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he has gathered them like sheaves for the threshing floor.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Arise, thresh, daughter of Zion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make your horns iron,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and your hoofs brass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so you might beat in pieces many peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and devote to the {\scaps Lord} their spoil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their wealth to the ruler of all the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}\uc1\u8216*Now cut yourself in bitter grief,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 daughter besieged by soldiers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They have set a wall around you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They strike the ruler of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the face with a rod.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Bethlehem in Ephrathah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 small among the tribes of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from you will come a king
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who will rule for me over Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose family line goes back to the distant past.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So the {\scaps Lord} will only abandon Israel to its enemies
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 until the woman in labour gives birth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Then the survivors will be reunited with their own people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And he will stand and shepherd by the strength of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the exalted name of the {\scaps Lord} his God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And they will live in security, for now he will be great,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 even to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}This will be our peace:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when Assyria comes into our land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and treads on our soil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 we will raise up against him seven shepherds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 eight leaders of men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They will shepherd Assyria with a sword,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the land of Nimrod with bared blades.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will deliver us from Assyria,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when they come into our land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and tread within our borders.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And the survivors of Jacob will be disbursed among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the midst of many peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like dew from the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like showers on the grass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 which don\uc1\u8217*t wait for people to come
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 or linger for mortals.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And the survivors of Jacob will be disbursed among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the midst of many peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a lion among the beasts of the forest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a young lion among the sheep-folds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who, when he passes through, pounces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He savages his prey. There is no rescuer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let your hand triumph over your adversaries,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let all your enemies be cut off.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On that day, says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will slaughter your horses from your midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and destroy your chariots.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will devastate the cities in your land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and tear down your fortresses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will destroy your magic charms,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and you will have no soothsayers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I will cut down your idols and sacred pillars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and you will not worship any more the work of your hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I will uproot your sacred poles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and destroy your idols.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}In my wrath and my anger
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will seek vengeance on the nations that ignore me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Israel\uc1\u8217*s False Conception of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Character and Demands

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Hear now what the {\scaps Lord} is saying:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Arise, present your complaint before the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 let the hills hear your voice!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hear, mountains, the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s accusation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 listen, foundations of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the {\scaps Lord} has a case against his people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He has a dispute with Israel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*My people, what have I done to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 How have I displeased you? Answer me!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For I brought you up from the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the land of slavery I redeemed you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I sent Moses, Aaron, and Miriam to lead you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My people, what did Balak, king of Moab counsel?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And how did Balaam, the son of Beor, answer him?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Remember now the journey from Shittim to Gilgal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that you might realise the just deeds of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}With what should I come before the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Bow myself before the God on high?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Should I come before him with burnt-offerings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with calves a year old?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Will the {\scaps Lord} be pleased with thousands of rams,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 With ten thousand streams of oil?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Should I give him my firstborn son for my guilt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} has told you what is good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 what he demands of you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Only to do justice and love mercy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and to walk humbly with your God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Guilt and Punishment of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Listen! The {\scaps Lord} calls to the city!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Listen, tribe and assembly of the city!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Can I forget the hoarded treasures in the houses of the wicked,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the accursed scant measure?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Can I leave her unpunished because of evil scales,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the bag of false weights?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Whose rich people are full of violence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 her inhabitants liars,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 whose tongues speak deceit?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*But I indeed, have begun to punish you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 to lay you in ruins because of your sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You will eat but not be satisfied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your stomach empty within you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You will store up but lose everything,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because whatever you save I will give to the sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}You will sow but not reap.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You will tread the olives but have no oil for rubbing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 tread grapes but drink no wine!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*For you have followed the commands of Omri,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all the practices of the house of Ahab.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You have acted in accord with their counsels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so I will give you up to ruin,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the city\uc1\u8217*s inhabitants to derision.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The nations will treat you with contempt!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Utter Degeneracy of the People

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Woe, woe is me, for I have become
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a field after harvest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a vineyard after gathering;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not a cluster of grapes to eat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 not a fig that anyone desires.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The honest have perished from the land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 of the upright among people there is none.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All of them lie in wait to shed blood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They hunt one another with the net.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Their hands know well how to do evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the officer and judge demands a bribe,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the high official decides as he pleases
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they conspire to pervert justice.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The best of them are like a thorn thicket,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their most upright like a prickly hedge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The day of their punishment has come,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 now will be their confusion!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Do not trust your neighbour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 do not rely on a friend.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From the wife who lies in your arms
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 guard your tongue.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For son insults father,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 daughter rises up against mother,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 daughter-in-law against mother-in-law,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a man\uc1\u8217*s enemies are the people of his own household.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Zion\uc1\u8217*s Ultimate Vindication and Exaltation

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But I will look to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will wait for the God of my salvation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My God will hear me!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Do not rejoice over me, my enemy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If I have fallen, I will rise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If I sit in darkness, the {\scaps Lord} is my light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The anger of the {\scaps Lord} I will bear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for against him have I sinned \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 until he champions my cause
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and gives judgment for me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will bring me into to the light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will see his justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So my enemy will see, and shame will cover them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they who said, \uc1\u8216*Where is the {\scaps Lord} your God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will look upon them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will be trampled on like mud in the street!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}It is a day for rebuilding your walls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 this day will your boundary will be extended.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This day they will come to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from Assyria and the cities of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and from Egypt even to the Euphrates River,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Though the land has become a desolation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because of its inhabitants, because of their deeds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Shepherd your flock with your staff, the flock that belong to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who live alone in the forest, in the midst of meadows;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that they may pasture in Bashon and Gilead as in the days of old,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}as in the days when you came from Egypt, gave us wonders to see.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Nations will see and be ashamed of all their might;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will put their hands to their mouth, their ears will become deaf,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}they will lick the dust like snakes, like creatures that crawl on the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will come trembling and in terror from their hiding places, in dread and fear.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Who is a God like you, forgiving iniquity
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and passing by the rebellion of the remnant of your people?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He does not retain his anger forever, but is one who delights in mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He will tread under foot our iniquity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you will cast into the depths of the sea all our iniquities.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You will show faithfulness to Jacob, and loving kindness to Abraham,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as you have sworn to our ancestors from the days of old.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Nahum (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Nahum

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}A message about Nineveh, a vision which came to Nahum from Elkosh.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God\uc1\u8217*s wrath

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} tolerates no rivals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} is vengeful and fierce in wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} does not fail to punish his foes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is vengeful against his enemies.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} is slow to anger,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 great in power.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The guilty will not escape
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his punishment.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Storm tempest is his path
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and cloud is the dust of his feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He rebukes the sea and dries it up
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and makes all the streams run dry.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Bashan and Carmel are languishing
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the bloom of Lebanon is withered.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The mountains tremble before him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the hills dissolve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The earth heaves before him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the world and all who live in it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Who can stand before his wrath?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Who can withstand the heat of his anger?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His fierce fury pours forth like fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he shatters rocks.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} is good to those who hope in him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a place of refuge in the day of trouble.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}With rushing flood an end he makes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 of those who rise against him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he drives his enemies into darkness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Why do you plot against the {\scaps Lord}?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He will end you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He only takes vengeance once.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Thorns, tangled and drenched,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are consumed like dry stubble.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Nineveh! From you has arisen
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 one who plots evil against the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a counsellor of wickedness.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Good news for Judah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Though they are many and strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they will pass away and be gone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though I have afflicted you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will afflict you no more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and now I will break his yoke from your necks
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and snap your chains.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The {\scaps Lord} has given this command concerning you, Nineveh:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Your name will no longer be remembered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will destroy every idol and image
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the house of your God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will destroy even your tomb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you are worthless.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Look! On the mountains a messenger
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bringing good news,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 announcing peace!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Celebrate the feasts, Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 fulfil your vows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Never again will these enemies invade your land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they are destroyed!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Destruction of the city

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2} Nineveh! The destroyer has come up against you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 mount guard upon the rampart;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 watch the road; brace yourselves;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 strengthen your might to the utmost.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For the {\scaps Lord} is restoring the majesty of Jacob
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 though the devastators have plundered them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and destroyed their vines.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The shields of his warriors are dyed red,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 his soldiers are clothed in scarlet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his chariots gleam like fire
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the day he prepares for battle
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 spears are shaken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Chariots rush across the fields,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 storm through the squares;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they flame like torches,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they dart like lightening.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}A leader rallies his nobles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they hurl themselves forward.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They speed on toward the wall;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the storming-shield is set up.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The water-gates are thrown open,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the palace dissolves in ruins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The queen is stripped,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 she is carried off.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her maids moan like doves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 beating upon their breasts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Like a pool of water is Nineveh,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 her waters fast ebbing away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Stand firm! Stand firm!\uc1\u8217* someone cries,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but no one turns back.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Loot the silver, loot the gold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for there is no end to the treasure,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the wealth and precious things.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nineveh is empty, desolate, devastated,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with faint heart and knocking knee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There is weakness in every limb,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and faces grow pale.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Where now is the den of lions?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Where now the lair of their young?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Where the lion used to withdraw,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with his cubs, with none to disturb them?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The lion tore enough for his cubs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and strangled prey for his lionesses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He filled his caves with the kill,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he filled his lairs with fresh meat.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*But see, I am against you,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} of hosts declares,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will burn your chariots in smoke and fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The sword will devour your young lions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You will never again prey on the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 No more will your messengers be heard.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Ruin

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Woe to the bloody city!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Full of lies and plunder,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 without end is the spoil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Hear the crack of the whip,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 hear the rattle of wheels.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Galloping horses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 jolting chariots.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Horsemen charging,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 swords flashing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 spears glittering,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a multitude of slain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a heap of bodies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 no end to the corpses
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 over which people stumble!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Because you acted like a whore,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bewitching the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 enticing the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I am against you, Nineveh\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} of hosts declares.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will strip your clothes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and show the nations your nakedness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the kingdoms your shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*I will fling loathsome filth at you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and make you an object of contempt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a spectacle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}so that everyone who sees you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will flee from you and say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Nineveh is laid waste,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who will mourn for her?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Are you any better than Thebes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which stood on the banks of the Nile,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 with waters around as a rampart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whose wall was the sea of waters?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Her strength was Ethiopia and Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The Libyans were her helpers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Put with its countless people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Yet she was exiled
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and made captive.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 On all corners of the streets
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 her infants were dashed to pieces.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Lots were cast for her nobles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all her great ones were bound in chains.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*You too, Nineveh, will be drunk with fear;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you too will seek a place of escape from the foe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}All your fortresses are fig trees with the first ripe figs;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 if shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Your troops are weak as women before your foes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the gates of your land are wide open;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your defenses burned down.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Draw water for the siege,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 strengthen your forts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Go to the clay pits and tread the clay;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 take up the brick moulds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}There the fire will consume you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sword will cut you down.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Multiply like the locust
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or a swarm of grasshoppers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Increase the numbers of your merchants
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 until they are more than the stars of heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}until your watchmen are locusts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and your scribes like grasshoppers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 which swarm in the hedges on a cold day;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but when the sun rises
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they fly away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 no one knows where.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*King of Assyria:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your princes slumber,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your nobles sleep!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your people are scattered on the mountains
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with no one to gather them!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There is no healing for your hurt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your wound is incurable.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All who hear of your fate clap their hands in joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for who has escaped your limitless cruelty?\uc1\u8217*
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Habakkuk (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Habakkuk

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Habakkuk\uc1\u8217*s message

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The message seen by the prophet Habakkuk.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 (Habakkuk)

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How long, {\scaps Lord}, have I cried out
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and without you hearing me!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I cry to you, \uc1\u8216*Violence!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but you do not help.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Why do you make me look upon wickedness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and behold trouble?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Destruction and violence are before my eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fighting and quarrelling.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Therefore the law is weak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and justice is never rendered;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the wicked surround the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that justice is perverted.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 (The Lord)

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Look at the nations, look well,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be shocked and amazed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I am about to do a work in your days;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will not believe it when it is told.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For I am about to raise up the Chaldeans,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a nation grim and quick of action
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who sweep over the whole breadth of the earth
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to seize dwellings not their own.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They bring fear and terror.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They write their own rules.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their horses are swifter than leopards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 quicker than wolves hunting at dusk.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 From afar they come swooping down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like an eagle attacking its prey.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They all come to do violence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a horde like a desert wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they gather up captives like sand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At kings they scoff,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and princes are sport to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They laugh at every fortress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and heap up earth to take it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then they sweep on like the wind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Their strength is their god.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 (Habakkuk)

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Are you not eternal, {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my holy one, who does not die?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 {\scaps Lord} you have appointed them to execute judgment,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 my rock, you have established them to punish.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Your eyes are too pure to look at evil,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you cannot condone iniquity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 So why do you regard the treacherous in silence,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while the wicked swallows the upright?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You have made people like the fish of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 like reptiles that have no ruler.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The wicked sweep them all into their nets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and gather them into their drag-nets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rejoice and celebrate.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore they sacrifice to their net,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and burn offerings to their drag-net;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for by their nets are their portions generous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their food is rich.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Will they empty their nets continually,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 slaughter nations unpityingly?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}I will take my stand on my watch-tower,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and station myself on a turret.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will watch to see what the {\scaps Lord} will say to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 what answer he will make to my complaint.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 (The Lord)

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then the {\scaps Lord} answered me and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Inscribe the vision plainly on tablets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that even someone running by could read it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Though the vision waits for the time set,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it hastens to fulfilment and will not fail;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though it linger long, wait for it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For it surely will come and will not be delayed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The strength of the proud fails,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but the upright lives by their faithfulness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Wealth is treacherous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the arrogant never have enough.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They make their desire as wide as Sheol,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are like death, unsatisfied,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they gather to themselves all the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 bring together to themselves all peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Shouldn\uc1\u8217*t everyone mock them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 sing a taunt-song against them, and say:
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Woe to the person who amasses what is not theirs,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and loads them self down with goods taken in pledge!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Won\uc1\u8217*t your creditors suddenly rise,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who will overthrow you awake,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you become their prey?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For as you have plundered many peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the survivors will prey upon you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You have shed blood and committed violence
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the earth, peoples and their cities.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Woe to you who seeks unjust gain for your dynasty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who sets your nest on high to be safe from the reach of misfortune!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You have planned only shame for your dynasty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You have destroyed many peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and brought guilt upon yourself;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}the stone will cry out from the wall,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the beam from the timber will answer it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Woe to the person who builds a city by bloodshed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and founds a town by crime
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}while the peoples toil for what fires will consume,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the nations weary themselves for nothing!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 This the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and the earth will be as full of the knowledge of the glory of the {\scaps Lord} as the seas are full of water.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Woe to him who in fury gives drink to his neighbor
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to make him drunk, and see him naked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}You are filled with shame, not glory;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 drink yourself and be uncovered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The cup from the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will pass in turn to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and shame will cover your glory!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For the violence done to Lebanon will overwhelm you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the destruction of animals will terrify you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because you shed people\uc1\u8217*s blood on the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 destroyed people and their cities.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}What use is an idol?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A human made it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a metal image.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It cannot speak,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 it cannot teach truth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why does its maker trust it?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Woe to the person who says to a block, awake!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to a dumb stone, arise!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What can it teach?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 It may be set with gold and silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but there is no breath at all within it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} is in his holy temple.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Let all the earth be silent before him!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Habakkuk\uc1\u8217*s psalm

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, according to the Shigionoth.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I have heard, {\scaps Lord}, of your fame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I have seen, {\scaps Lord}, your work;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 through the years you have make yourself known,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in wrath you remember mercy.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}God comes from Teman,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Holy One from the mountain-land of Paran. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His glory covers the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his splendour fills the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Before him it is like the light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 rays he has at his side,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 where his power is hidden.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Before him pestilence stalks,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 after him plague follows.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He stands, and the earth trembles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he looks, and the nations melt away,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the mountains of old are scattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the everlasting hills bow down.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 These are his ways from of old.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The tents of Cushan are afraid,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the curtains of Midian tremble.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Is your wrath, {\scaps Lord}, with the rivers?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Is your anger against the streams?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or your rage against the sea?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Is that why you ride on your war-steeds?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why you mount your chariots of victory?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Why you bare your bow?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Why you fill your quiver with shafts?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You split the earth with torrents.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The mountains see you and writhe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The tempest of waters sweeps by.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The great deep sends forth its voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and lifts up its hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The sun forgets to rise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The moon stands still in its place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Your arrows go forth to give light.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Your glittering spear is as lightning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In rage you stride over the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 In wrath you trample the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You go forth to save your people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You go to help your anointed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You crush the head of the wicked nation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 laying him bare from thigh to neck. {\i Selah}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You pierced his head with his spears,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as his champions storm out to scatter us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as they rejoice to devour the poor secretly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}You tread the sea with your horses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while the mighty waters roar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I hear, and my body trembles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and at the sound my lips quiver.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 My bones begin to decay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and my footsteps totter beneath me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 while I long for the day of distress
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to come upon those who attack us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Though the fig tree bears no fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and there are no grapes on the vines,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 though the olive harvest fails,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the fields produce no food,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 though the flock is cut off from the fold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and there is no herd in the stalls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}yet I will exult in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rejoice in the God who saves me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The Lord {\scaps God} is my strength;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he makes my feet as sure as the feet of deer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and causes me to walk on the heights!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 To the music director: Use stringed instruments.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Zephaniah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Zephaniah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message, which came to Zephaniah, son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hezekiah, in the time of Josiah of Judah who was son of Amon.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Day of Judgment on Judah

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I will utterly destroy everything
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from off the face of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I will sweep away human and animal,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the birds of the sky
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the fish of the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will cause the wicked to stumble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will cut off humanity from the face of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I will stretch out my hand over Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will cut off from this place the last remnant of Baal
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the name of the heathen priests,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and those who worship on the housetops
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to the stars in the sky,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and those worshippers of the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who also pay homage to Milcom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and those who turn back
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from following the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And those who do not seek the {\scaps Lord}
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor strive to find him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Be silent before the Lord {\scaps God},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for near is the day of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the {\scaps Lord} has prepared a sacrifice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he has sanctified his guests.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On the day of the {\scaps Lord\uc1\u8217*s} sacrifice:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will punish the officers and the royal princes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all those who clothe themselves in foreign apparel.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On that day:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will punish all who leap over the threshold,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who fill the house of their lord with violence and deceit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Listen on that day, says the {\scaps Lord}:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 A cry will be heard from the Fish Gate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a wailing from the New Quarter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and a great din from the hills.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Those who live in the Mortar wail,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for all the traders are silenced,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the money counters wiped out.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will search Jerusalem with a lamp,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will punish those who are at ease,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 who sit comfortably with their wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who say to themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*the {\scaps Lord} brings neither prosperity nor calamity.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Their wealth will become a prey
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their houses a desolation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Though they build houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they will not inhabit them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 though they plant vineyards,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they will not drink wine from them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Near is the day of the {\scaps Lord}!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Near and rapidly approaching!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Near is the bitter day of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the scream of the warrior.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}That day is a day of wrath,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a day of trouble and distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a day of destruction and desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a day of darkness and gloom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a day of clouds and thick darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}a day of the trumpet and battle-cry,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 against the fortified cities
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and against the high battlements.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And I will bring distress upon the people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and they will walk as the blind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because they have sinned against the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their blood will be poured out as dust
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their flesh as dung.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them. For in the day of the wrath of the {\scaps Lord} and in the fire of his fury the whole earth will be consumed. For he will make a speedy end of all the inhabitants of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Imminent Judgment upon the Nations

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Be ashamed within yourselves, be ashamed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}before you become as the drifting chaff,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before the anger of the {\scaps Lord} comes upon you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before the day of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s wrath comes upon you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Seek the {\scaps Lord} all you meek of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you who obey his law;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Seek righteousness, seek meekness;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 perhaps you may be hidden in the day of the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s wrath.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For Gaza will be forsaken;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Ashkelon a desolation;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ashdod \uc1\u8211* by noon will they rout her
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and Ekron be torn up!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Woe to those who live by the sea coast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 people of the Cherethites!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The word of the {\scaps Lord} is against you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Canaan, land of the Philistines!
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 I will destroy you so that you will be without inhabitants,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and you will become shepherds\uc1\u8217* cots and folds for flocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The sea coast will belong to the survivors of the house of Judah.They will pasture their flocks there. In the house of Ashkelon they will lie down at evening. The {\scaps Lord} their God will be with them and restore their fortunes.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I have heard the taunts of Moab,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the revilings of the Ammonites,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 how they have taunted my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and spoken boastfully concerning their border.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Therefore as I live, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, the God of Israel:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Moab will be like Sodom,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and the Ammonites like Gomorrah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a pile of nettles and saltpits,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and a desolation, forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 The residue of my people will plunder them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and the survivors of my nation will inherit them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This will they have for their pride,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because they have taunted and spoken boastfully
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 against the people of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} will terrify them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will reduce all the gods of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then all the peoples of the nations will worship him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 each in their own land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}You, also, Ethiopians,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 slain by his sword are you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And he will stretch out his hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 against the north and destroy Assyria;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And he will make Nineveh a desolation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 dry as the wilderness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Herds will lie down in it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 every beast of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Desert owl and screech owl
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 will lodge in its capitals.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The owl will hoot in the window,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the raven on the doorstep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all stripped bare of cedar.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This is the exultant city which sat secure. The city who said to herself, I am and there is none else! How has she become a desolation! A lair of beasts! Every passerby hisses at her, shakes their hand.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s Deep-seated Corruption

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Woe to the rebellious and unclean city of oppression,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}She has not obeyed the voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 she has not accepted instruction,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In the {\scaps Lord} she has not trusted,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to her God she has not drawn near.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Her rulers in her midst are roaring lions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her judges are evening wolves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who leave nothing over until the morning,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Her prophets are braggarts, faithless men.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Her priests profane what is holy
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and do violence to the law.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} is righteous in her midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he does no wrong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Morning by morning
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he establishes his decree,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Light is not lacking,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 an oversight is unknown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But the unjust know no shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*I have cut off nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their turrets are destroyed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have laid waste their broad streets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that none passes over them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Desolate are their cities without people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 without inhabitants.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Surely the city will fear me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 she will accept instruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Nothing will vanish from her eyes
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 that I have impressed upon her;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But the more zealously have they made all their deeds corrupt.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Future Vindication and Exultation of Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Wait for me, is the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message, until the day when I stand up as a witness, for it is my fixed purpose to gather the nations, to collect the kingdoms, to pour upon them my wrath and my hot anger; for by the fire of my fury will all the earth be consumed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For then I will purify the lips of all peoples, so that they will all call on the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s name, to serve him with one accord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}From beyond the rivers of Cush my worshipers will bring me offerings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On that day you will no longer be ashamed of all your deeds by which you rebelled against me. For I will rid you of your proudly arrogant ones, and you will never again be haughty on my holy mountain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But I will leave in your midst a people humble and poor, and the remnant of Israel will trust in the name of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They will not do evil, nor speak falsehood, and a deceitful tongue will not be found in their mouth; but they will pasture and lie down, and no one will make them afraid.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Cry out with joy, daughter of Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shout aloud, Israel!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Rejoice and exult with all your heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 daughter of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The {\scaps Lord} has put away your adversaries,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he has turned away your foes;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} is king in your midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will fear evil no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In that day it will be said to Jerusalem:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Fear not!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Zion, let not your hands grow weak!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The {\scaps Lord} your God is in your midst,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a victorious hero.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will rejoice over you with joy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will renew his love,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he will exult over you with singing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}as on a day of festival.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will take away from you your disgrace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and put away from you your reproach.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I will destroy at that time
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all who afflict you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will deliver the lame,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and gather the outcast,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make them an object of renown
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and fame in all the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I will do good to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 at the time when I gather you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I will make you an object of fame and renown
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 among all the peoples of the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 when I bring back your captivity before your eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 This says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Haggai (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Haggai

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The call to rebuild the Temple

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the second year of Darius the king, on the first day of the sixth month, this message from the {\scaps Lord} came through Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The people say that the time has not yet come to rebuild the temple of the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then this message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai the prophet:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Is it a time for you yourselves to live in your own well-roofed houses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 while this temple lies in ruins?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Consider your past experiences.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You sow much,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but bring in little;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you eat,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but you do not have enough;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you drink,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but are not filled;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you clothe yourselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but not enough to be warm;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and those who earn wages,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 put those wages in a bag with holes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Consider your experiences.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Go up to the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and bring wood
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and rebuild the temple;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 then I will be pleased with it,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will reveal my glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You looked for much,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and it came to little;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and when you brought the harvest home,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I blew it away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Why?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Because my temple lies in ruins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 while you shelter in your own houses.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The heavens withhold the dew,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the earth withholds its fruit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and I have called forth a drought upon the land
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and upon the mountains,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and upon the grain and the new wine and the oil
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and upon that which the ground brings forth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and upon people and animals,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and upon all the labor of your hands.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshua the son of Jehozadak the high priest, with all the rest of the people, obeyed the command of the {\scaps Lord} their God and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the {\scaps Lord} their God had sent him to them. They showed proper respect for the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Haggai, the prophet of the {\scaps Lord}, as the {\scaps Lord} commanded him, told the people: \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} says: I am with you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the {\scaps Lord} stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Jehozadak the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people, so that they came and worked on the temple of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, their God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}in the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The future glory of the new Temple

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 In the second year of Darius the king,{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}on the twenty-first day of the seventh month, this message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai the prophet,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}telling him to speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to all the rest of the people:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Who is left among you that saw this temple in its former glory?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And how do you see it now?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Doesn\uc1\u8217*t it seem as though there is nothing there?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Yet now be strong, Zerubbabel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be strong, Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 be strong, all you people of the land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Begin the work, for I am with you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When your ancestors left Egypt I made a promise to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I am still with you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Do not be afraid!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In a little while, I will shake the heavens,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the earth, and the sea, and the land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And I will shake all nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the precious things of all nations shall come here;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will fill this temple with glory.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The silver is mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the gold is mine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The later glory of this temple
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 shall be greater than the former.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In this place I will grant prosperity.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
This is the message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Former displeasure and the new promise of blessings

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, this message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai the prophet:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: \uc1\u8216*Ask the priests for a ruling:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*If one carries consecrated meat in the fold of his garment, and with that garment touches bread, or stew, or wine, or oil, or any food, will it become holy?\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 And the priests answered: \uc1\u8216*No.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then said Haggai, \uc1\u8216*If one who is unclean by reason of a dead body touches any of these, will it be unclean?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 And the priests answered: \uc1\u8216*It would be unclean.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Haggai replied: \uc1\u8216*So is this people and so is this nation before me, the {\scaps Lord} declares, and so is every work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Think back from this day, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}How were you? When you came to a heap of grain expecting twenty measures, there were only ten; when you came to the wine vat to draw out fifty vessels, there were only twenty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*I struck all the work of your hands with blasting and blight, with mildew and with hail. Yet you didn\uc1\u8217*t turn to me,\uc1\u8221* says the {\scaps Lord},{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*Think back from this day, think! From the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day when the foundations of the temple of the {\scaps Lord} were laid, and consider.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The seed is in the granary, but the vine and the fig tree and the pomegranate and the olive tree have not yet brought forth fruit. From this day will I bless you.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Zerubbabel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}This message from the {\scaps Lord} came to Haggai a second time on the twenty-fourth day of the month:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Tell Zerubbabel, governor of Judah:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will shake the heavens and the earth;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will overthrow the chariots,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who ride in them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the horses and their riders shall come down,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 each by the sword of his fellow.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}In that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will take you, Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} says,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and will make you like a signet ring, for I have chosen you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Zechariah (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Zechariah

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lesson from the Past

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the eighth month in the second year of Darius, this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} was furious with your ancestors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So tell the people this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts: \uc1\u8216*Return to me,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*and I will return to you\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Do not be like your ancestors to whom the former prophets cried, \uc1\u8220*The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says to turn now from your evil ways, and from your evil deeds\uc1\u8221*. They did not heed nor listen to me,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Your ancestors, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But did not my words and my statutes with which I charged my servants the prophets overtake your ancestors? And they repented and said, \uc1\u8220*Just as the {\scaps Lord} of hosts planned to do to us, according to our ways, and according to our deeds, so he has dealt with us.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Jealous Love for Zion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I saw in the night a man on a red horse, among the myrtle trees that were in the valley-bottom. Behind him there were horses, red, sorrel, and white.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then said I, \uc1\u8216*My Lord, what are these?\uc1\u8217* And the messenger who was talking with me said, \uc1\u8216*I will show you what they are.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And the man who was standing among the myrtle trees answered, \uc1\u8216*They are those whom the {\scaps Lord} has sent to patrol the earth.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And the riders answered the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} who was standing among the myrtle trees, \uc1\u8216*We have gone up and down through the world and behold, all the earth is still and at peace.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} said, \uc1\u8216*{\scaps Lord} of hosts, how long will you have no pity for Jerusalem and the cities of Judah with which you have been angry for seventy years?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And the {\scaps Lord} answered the messenger who was talking with me with kind and comforting words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So the messenger who was talking with me said to me, \uc1\u8216*Proclaim now that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: I am deeply concerned for Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But I am deeply angry with the arrogant, complacent nations. I was only a little angry with Israel but they made the suffering worse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore, says the {\scaps Lord}, I am turning to show mercy to Jerusalem. My temple will be rebuilt in it, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and a measuring line will be stretched over Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Proclaim again: Thus says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts: My cities will again overflow with prosperity and the {\scaps Lord} will again comfort Zion and choose Jerusalem.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Destruction of the Heathen Powers

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now I looked up and saw four horns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I said to the messenger who was talking with me, \uc1\u8216*What are these?\uc1\u8217* He answered, \uc1\u8216*These are the horns which scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then the {\scaps Lord} showed me four smiths.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I said, \uc1\u8216*What are these coming to do?\uc1\u8217* He answered, \uc1\u8216*The horns scattered Judah, so that no one dared lift their head. But the smiths have come to terrify them, to crush the horns of the nations which lifted up their horn against the land of Judah to scatter its people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promise that Jerusalem Will be Gloriously Restored

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Then I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I said, \uc1\u8216*Where are you going?\uc1\u8217* He replied, \uc1\u8216*To measure Jerusalem, to see what is its breadth and length.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the messenger who talked with me stepped forward, and another messenger went out to meet him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Run and tell to that young man that Jerusalem will be inhabited like a village without walls, because so many people and cattle will live there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For I, says the {\scaps Lord}, will be a wall of fire  her, and I will be the glory in the midst of her.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Up! Away! Flee from the land of the north, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heavens, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Up, escape to Zion, you who live in Babylon.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This is what the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says to the nations which plundered you:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Whoever touches you touches the apple of my eye.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will raise my hand against them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will be plunder for their own slaves; and you will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Sing and rejoice, daughter of Zion! I am coming,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will live among you, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Many nations will join themselves to the {\scaps Lord} in that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and will be his people, and he will live among you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 You will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The {\scaps Lord} will inherit Judah as his portion in the holy land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 He will again choose Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Be silent, everyone, in the presence of the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because he is coming from his holy dwelling.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Purification of the Priesthood and Nation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Then he showed me Joshua, the high priest, standing before the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} and the Adversary standing at his right hand to accuse him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} said to the Adversary, \uc1\u8216*May the {\scaps Lord} rebuke you, Adversary! The {\scaps Lord}, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this man a brand plucked out of the fire?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments and was standing before the messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The messenger said to those who stood before him, \uc1\u8216*Take off his filthy garments.\uc1\u8217* Then to Joshua he said, \uc1\u8216*I have taken your guilt from you and I will clothe you in priestly robes.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he ordered: \uc1\u8216*Set a clean turban upon his head.\uc1\u8217* So they set a clean turban on his head, and clothed him with garments. The messenger of the {\scaps Lord} was standing by.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} testified to Joshua:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: \uc1\u8216*If you walk in my ways, and if you will keep my instructions, then you will rule my house and keep my courts and I will give you a place of access among these that stand by.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Hear now, Joshua the high priest, you and your associates who sit before me; for they are men who are a sign; for I am going to bring forth my servant the Branch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On the stone that I have set before Joshua, on one stone, are seven facets. I will engrave it,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*and I will remove the guilt of that land in one day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On that day,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*you will each invite your neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Supporters of the Temple Service

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Then the messenger who talked with me came again and woke me, as someone who is woken from sleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He said to me, \uc1\u8216*What do you see?\uc1\u8217* I said, \uc1\u8216*I see a candlestick, all of gold, with a bowl on its top, and seven lamps on it. There are seven pipes to each of the lamps, which are on its top,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and two olive trees next to it, one on the right side of the bowl, and the other on its left side.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I said to the messenger who talked with me, \uc1\u8216*What are these, my lord?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the messenger who talked with me answered, \uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t you know what these are?\uc1\u8217* And I said. \uc1\u8216*No, my lord.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said to me, \uc1\u8216*This is the message of the {\scaps Lord} regarding Zerubbabel: Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}will I make the great mountain before Zerubbabel a plain. He will bring forth the top stones with shoutings of, \uc1\u8220*Grace, grace, to it.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Moreover this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house. His hands will also finish it. Then you will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For who has despised the day of small things? They will rejoice, and will see the plumb line in the hand of Zerubbabel. (The seven lamps are the eyes of the {\scaps Lord} that search all around the world.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Again I asked, \uc1\u8216*What are these two olive trees on the right side of the candlestick and on its left side?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Again, \uc1\u8216*What are these two branches of the olive trees, which are pouring out the golden oil through the two golden pipes?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He answered me, \uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t you now what these are?\uc1\u8217* And I said, \uc1\u8216*No, my lord.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he explained, \uc1\u8216*They are the two anointed ones who attend the Lord of all the earth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Flying Scroll

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Then again I looked up and saw a flying scroll.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He said to me, \uc1\u8216*What do you see?\uc1\u8217* I answered, \uc1\u8216*I see a flying scroll; twenty cubits long, ten cubits wide.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then he said to me, \uc1\u8216*This is the curse that goes over the whole land. Every thief will be banished according to the writing on one side and everyone who lies under oath shall be banished according to the writing on the other side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I have sent it out, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and it will enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of anyone who swears falsely by my name. It will remain in the midst of his house and will consume it with its timber and its stones.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Woman in an Ephah

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the messenger who talked with me came forward, and said to me, \uc1\u8216*Look up and see what is now coming.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I said. \uc1\u8216*What is it?\uc1\u8217* He said, \uc1\u8216*It is a measuring basket, full of the guilt of the land.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A round leaden cover was lifted up, and there was a woman sitting in the middle of the basket.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He said, \uc1\u8216*This is Wickedness.\uc1\u8217* He thrust her down into the midst of the basket and he pushed the round leaden cover back on its mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then I looked up and saw two women, and the wind was in their wings. They had wings like the wings of a stork and they lifted up the basket between them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then I said to the messenger who talked with me, \uc1\u8216*Where are they taking the basket?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He said to me, \uc1\u8216*To build her a house in the land of Shinar. When it is prepared, they will rest the basket there.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The War-Chariots of the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Again I looked up, and saw four chariots come from between two mountains. The mountains were mountains of bronze.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The first chariot had red horses. The second chariot had black horses,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}the third chariot white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled horses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I said to the messenger who talked with me, \uc1\u8216*What are these, my lord?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The messenger answered me, \uc1\u8216*These are the four winds of heaven going out after standing before the {\scaps Lord} of all the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The black horses are going toward the north country and the white toward the west and the dappled toward the south country.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The strong horses came out, and were impatient to patrol the earth. So he said, \uc1\u8216*Go, patrol the earth,\uc1\u8217* and they did so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then he cried out to me, \uc1\u8216*The horses that went to the north country will quiet my spirit in the north country.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Preparations for the Crowning of Zerubbabel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now this message of the {\scaps Lord} came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Take the gifts from the exiles Heldai, Tobijah and Jedaiah who have come from Babylon and go at once to Josiah the son of Zephaniah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Take their silver and gold and make a crown and set it on the head of the high priest, Joshua son of Jehozadak.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Tell him: \uc1\u8216*Thus says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts: Behold, the man whose name is the Branch. He will branch out from his place and rebuild the temple of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He will rebuild the temple and will sit and rule upon his throne, receiving the honour due to a king. A priest will stand by his throne and they will work together in peace and harmony.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The crown will be a memorial in the temple of the {\scaps Lord} for Heldai and Tobijah and Jedaiah, and Josiah the son of Zephaniah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}People from far away will come and build in the temple of the {\scaps Lord} and you will know that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts has sent me to you. This will happen if you diligently obey the voice of the {\scaps Lord} your God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Real Demands

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}In the fourth year of the reign of King Darius, on the fourth day of Chislev, the ninth month, the message of the {\scaps Lord} came to Zechariah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The city of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech and their men, to entreat the favour of the {\scaps Lord},{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and to ask the priests of the house of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and the prophets \uc1\u8216*Should I continue to mourn in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done for many years?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Tell all the people of the land and the priests, \uc1\u8216*When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and in the seventh month, for these seventy years, did you really fast for me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When you eat and when you drink, do you not eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Wasn\uc1\u8217*t it this which the {\scaps Lord} proclaimed by the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and prosperous, and her towns surrounding her and the Negreb and the Shephelah were inhabited?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The {\scaps Lord} gave this message to Zechariah:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says, execute true judgments. Show kindness and mercy to each other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Do not oppress the widow or the orphan, the resident foreigner or the poor. Let none of you devise evil against another in your hearts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But they refused to listen, and turned a stubborn shoulder, and stopped their ears so they wouldn\uc1\u8217*t hear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They made their hearts as hard as stone so they wouldn\uc1\u8217*t accept the teaching and the words that the {\scaps Lord} of hosts had sent by his spirit through the earlier prophets. Great was the anger of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I called and they would not hear, so they call and I do not hear, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I scattered them by a whirlwind out among nations unknown to them. The land was left desolate behind them, with no one crossing or returning, for they made the pleasant land a desolation.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Promises that the Scattered Exiles Will Return and the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Rule be Widely Acknowledged

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Now this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts came to me:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I passionately care for Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I am fiercely protective of her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The {\scaps Lord} says, I have returned to Zion,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Jerusalem will be called, \uc1\u8220*The City of Truth\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the mountain of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8220*The Holy Mountain.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Old men and old women will sit again in the squares of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 each leaning on a staff because of old age.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the streets of the city will be full of boys,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and of girls playing in its squares.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Just because it seems impossible to the remnant of this people in these days,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 is it also impossible for me? says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will rescue my people
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the land of the east and the land of the west.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will bring them and they will live in Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will be my people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will be their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in truth and righteousness.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: Let your hands be strong, you who hear in these days the words of the prophets spoken when the foundations for the house of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts were laid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For before those days there were no wages for people or animals. No one could go out or return safe from enemies, because I set each against their neighbour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But now I will treat the remnant of the people differently from former days, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Peace will be sown.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The vine will bear its fruit and the ground will yield its produce,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the skies will give their dew.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will give the remnant of this people all these things.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Just as you were accursed among the nations,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 house of Judah and house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so I will save you and you will be a blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Do not be afraid, but let your hands be strong.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: As I planned to do evil to you when your ancestors provoked me to anger, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and I did not relent,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so again have I planned in these days to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not be afraid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}These are the things that you should do: Speak the truth to each other. Render peaceful decisions in your gates.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Let none of you devise evil in your heart against one another. Do not love perjury. All these are things I hate, says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And this message of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts came to me:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, will be festivals of joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts for the house of Judah. Therefore love truth and peace.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: Peoples, and the inhabitants of many cities will come,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and the inhabitants of one city will go to another, saying, \uc1\u8216*Let us go speedily to entreat the favour of the {\scaps Lord}, and to seek the {\scaps Lord} of hosts; I will go also.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Many peoples and strong nations will come to seek the {\scaps Lord} of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the favour of the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: In those days ten people from all languages and nations will take hold of the robe of a Jew, saying, \uc1\u8216*We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Conquest of Israel\uc1\u8217*s Foes

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}An oracle:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The message of the {\scaps Lord} concerns the land of Hadrach,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 it rests upon Damascus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the capital of Aram belongs to the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the tribes of Israel do,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and also Hamath which borders on it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Tyre and Sidon, for all their wisdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Tyre built for herself a fortress.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Heaped up silver as dust,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and gold like the dirt of the streets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But now the Lord will dispossess her,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 cast down her rampart into the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 She will be consumed in fire.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Ashkelon will see and fear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Gaza writhe in anguish,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ekron, also for her hope will be put to shame.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The king will perish from Gaza,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Ashkelon will remain uninhabited.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}A foreign people will settle in Ashdod,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will humble the pride of the Philistines.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I will take their blood from their mouth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their abominations from between their teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They also will be a remnant for our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a clan in Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and Ekron will be like the Jebusites.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But I will encamp as a guard about my house,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that none will pass through or return,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and no oppressor will pass through them again,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for now I have seen with my own eyes.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Shout aloud, daughter of Jerusalem!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Look, your king comes to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Vindicated and victorious is he,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 humble, and riding on a donkey,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He will cut off chariots from Ephraim,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and war horses from Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The battle bow will be cut off,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and he will speak peace to the nations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 His rule will be from sea to sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the river to the ends of the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And you, too \uc1\u8211* because of your blood covenant,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I have set free your prisoners from the waterless pit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}To the stronghold will the prisoners of hope return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 This day I declare, I will restore double to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For I have bent Judah to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a bow which I have filled with Ephraim like an arrow.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will urge your sons, Zion, against the sons of Greece,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will make you like the sword of a hero.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the {\scaps Lord} will be seen above them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and his arrow will go forth like lightning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The {\scaps Lord} will blow a blast upon a trumpet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and travel on the whirlwinds of the south.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The {\scaps Lord} of hosts will defend them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will devour and tread down the slingstones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will drink their blood like wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will be full like a bowl,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like the crevices of the altar.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the {\scaps Lord} their God will save them on that day,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the flock of his people,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the jewel of a crown
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 shining in his land.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}How good and how beautiful will it be!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Corn will make the young men flourish
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and new wine the young women!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Victory and Restoration for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Betrayed but Loyal People

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Ask from the {\scaps Lord} rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 at the time of spring rain,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the {\scaps Lord} who forms the storm clouds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the showers of rain he gives to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and green in the field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But the household gods speak nonsense,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the diviners see lies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and relate idle dreams.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 In vain they offer comfort,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so the people wander like sheep,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They suffer because there is no shepherd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}My wrath is hot against the shepherds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and on the leaders will I bring punishment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For the {\scaps Lord} cares for his flock,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the house of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and will make them his splendid war steeds.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}From Judah will come the cornerstone and the stay,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from them the battle bow,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from them goes forth every commander.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Together they will trample on warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as on the dirt of the streets in battle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They fight, for the {\scaps Lord} is with them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 putting the riders on horses to shame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will make strong the house of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will bring deliverance to the house of Joseph,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will bring them back for I have compassion on them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will be as if I had not driven them away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For I am the {\scaps Lord} their God and will answer them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The Ephraimites will be like warriors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their hearts will rejoice as with wine,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 their children will see and rejoice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their hearts will exult in the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I will whistle for them, and gather them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will be as many as they once were.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will sow them among the peoples,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but in distant lands they will remember me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will bring up their children and come back.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I will bring them home from the land of Egypt,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and from Assyria will I gather them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Into the land of Gilead and Lebanon I will bring them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 until the land overflows with them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And when they pass through the sea of distress,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will strike down the waves of the sea,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and all the deeps of the Nile will be dried up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The pride of Assyria will be brought low
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the sceptre of Egypt turned aside.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will make them strong in the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will walk in his name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord}.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Fate of Judah\uc1\u8217*s Traitorous Rulers and the Ultimate Deliverance

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Open your doors, Lebanon,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that fire may devour your cedars.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Wail, pine-tree, for the cedar is fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Wail, oaks of Bashan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for the inaccessible forest has fallen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Listen to the wailing of the shepherds!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Their glory is destroyed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Listen to the roaring of young lions!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Blasted is the thick forest of the Jordan.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The {\scaps Lord} said to me: shepherd the flock destined for slaughter,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}whose possessors slaughter them, and hold themselves not guilty! The people who sell them say, Blessed be the {\scaps Lord}, for I am rich! And their own shepherds have no compassion for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I will no longer have pity on the people of this earth, says the {\scaps Lord}. I will turn neighbour against neighbour, and put everyone under the power of a king, and when the land is devastated I will not rescue them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So I shepherded the flock of slaughter for the sheep-merchants. I took two staffs: one I called Mercy and the other I called Union. So I shepherded the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I set aside three of the shepherds in one month; for I was indignant against them, and they also were displeased at me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I said, I will not shepherd you. What is dead, let it die. What is set aside, let it be set aside. And let those who are left devour one another\uc1\u8217*s flesh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I took my staff, Mercy, and broke it, so as to break my covenant which I had made with all the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In that day it was broken, and the sheep-merchants who watched me knew that it was the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And I said to them, \uc1\u8216*If it is good in your sight, give me my wage. If not, don\uc1\u8217*t.\uc1\u8217* So they weighed out my wage, thirty pieces of silver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And the {\scaps Lord} said to me, Cast it into the treasury \uc1\u8211* the precious wage that at which I was valued by them! So I took the thirty pieces of silver and cast them into the house of the {\scaps Lord}, into the treasury.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then I broke my second staff called Union so as to dissolve the brotherhood between Judah and Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And the {\scaps Lord} said to me: Take again the implements of a worthless shepherd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For I am about to appoint a shepherd over the land. Those who are thrust down he will not visit. Those who are scattered he will not seek out. The wounded he will not heal, the sick he will not make whole, but the flesh of the fat he will devour and even their hoofs he will tear.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Woe to my worthless shepherd, who deserts the flock!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 May the sword strike his arm and his right eye.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 May his arm completely wither.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And his right eye be blinded.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Jerusalem\uc1\u8217*s Deliverance from Heathen Attack

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}An oracle. This is the message of the {\scaps Lord} about Israel. The {\scaps Lord} who stretches out the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the human spirit within people says:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Look! I am about to make Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a cup of drunkenness for all the surrounding peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 There will be a siege of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On that day that I will make Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a stone to be lifted up by all the peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 All who lift it up will surely hurt themselves!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And all the nations of the earth will be gathered together against it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On that day, says the {\scaps Lord}, I will strike
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 every horse with panic and its rider with madness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But over the house of Judah I will keep watch,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 though I strike every horse belonging to the peoples with blindness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the chieftains of Judah will say to themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*The strength of the inhabitants is in the {\scaps Lord} of hosts their God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In that day I will make the chieftains of Judah
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a pan of fire in the woods,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 like a torch among sheaves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they will devour right and left all the surrounding peoples.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 But Jerusalem will abide on its own site.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And the {\scaps Lord} will first give victory to the tents of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so that the glory of the house of David, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem be not exalted above Judah.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In that day the {\scaps Lord} will protect the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the feeblest among them will in that day be like David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the house of David like God, like the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} before them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And in that day I will seek to destroy all the nations who have come up against Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the spirit of pity and compassion. They will look on him whom they have pierced
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and they will lament for him as one laments for an only son.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will bitterly grieve for him as one grieves for the firstborn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In that day mourning will be as great in Jerusalem
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as the mourning for Hadad-rimmon in the plain of Megiddo.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And the land will mourn, each family by itself:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the family of the house of David by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the family of the house of Nathan by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and the family of the house of Levi by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the family of the Shimeites by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their wives by themselves,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and all the families who are left, each by itself,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and their wives by themselves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}On that day a fountain will be opened for the house of David,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And it will be on that day, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will cut off the names of the idols from the land and they will be remembered no more.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And the prophets and the unclean spirit I will banish from the land.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If any man prophesy any more,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 his father and his mother who bore him, will say to him,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*You will not live, for you speak falsehood in the name of the {\scaps Lord}.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And his father and his mother who bore him will stab him through when he is seized by the prophetic frenzy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And it will be in that day that the prophets will be ashamed, each of his vision,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and will not wear the hairy mantle in order to deceive.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Each will say, \uc1\u8216*I am not a prophet,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a tiller of the ground am I, for the ground is my possession from my youth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And they will say to him, \uc1\u8216*What are these scars on your back?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 And he will say, \uc1\u8216*The scars which I received in the house of my friends.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Awake, sword, against my shepherd,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 against the man who stands near to me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will strike the shepherd so that the sheep may be scattered,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will turn my hand against the little ones.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In all the land, says the {\scaps Lord},
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 two-thirds in it will be cut off and die,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 but a third will be left in it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I will bring the third into the fire,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and melt it as one melts silver,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and test it as one tests gold.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Then they will call on my name,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I myself will answer them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 I will say, \uc1\u8216*They are my people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 They will say, \uc1\u8216*The {\scaps Lord} is our God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Judgment upon the Heathen and the Exaltation of the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}A day is coming for the {\scaps Lord}, when your plundered possessions will be divided while you watch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And all the nations will gather to Jerusalem, to fight against it. The city will be taken and the houses plundered and the women raped. Half of the city will go into captivity, and the rest of the people left in the ruins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the {\scaps Lord} will go forth and fight against these nations, as once he fought in the day of battle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, (which is opposite Jerusalem, on the east). The Mount of Olives will be split into halves, from east to west, by an exceedingly great valley; and half of the mountain will slide northwards and half southwards.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You will escape through my valley \uc1\u8211* the valley between the hills will extend as far as Azel, and you will flee as you fled from before the earthquake, in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. But the {\scaps Lord} your God will come, and all the holy ones with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And in that day, there will be no heat nor cold nor frost,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but it will be constant day \uc1\u8211* it is known to the {\scaps Lord} \uc1\u8211* with neither day nor night. Even at evening time there will be light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And on that day living waters will flow from Jerusalem, half of them to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea; in both summer and winter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The {\scaps Lord} will be king over all the earth. On that day the {\scaps Lord} will be one, and his name one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The land will be changed to plain, from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem, but Jerusalem will be high and inhabited as it stands, from the Benjamin Gate up to the place of the first gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the Corner Gate, and as far as the king\uc1\u8217*s winepresses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Jerusalem will be inhabited, for never again will it be doomed to destruction, and its people will abide in security.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This is the plague with which the {\scaps Lord} will strike all the peoples who array themselves against Jerusalem: he will make their flesh rot while they stand on their feet, and their eyes will rot in their sockets, and their tongues will rot in their mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On that day a great panic sent by the Lord will fall on them. Everyone will seize their neighbours and attack them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Even Judah will fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of the surrounding nations will be gathered up \uc1\u8211* gold and silver and piles of clothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Plague will fall upon the horses, mules, camels, and asses, and on all the animals in all those camps.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}All who are left of all the nations which fought against Jerusalem will come up from year to year to worship the King, the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, and to keep the pilgrim-feast of tabernacles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Whoever of all the peoples of the earth will not come up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, on them there will be no rain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If the family of Egypt does not go up nor enter in, on them also will come the plague with which the {\scaps Lord} will strike the nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This will be the punishment for the sin of Egypt and the punishment for the sin of all nations which do not come up to keep the feast of the tabernacles.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}On that day there will be inscribed upon the bells of the horses, \uc1\u8220*Holy to the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8221* and the pots in the house of the {\scaps Lord} will be as holy as the sacrificial bowls before the altars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy to the {\scaps Lord} of hosts and all who sacrifice will come and take of them and cook the sacrifices in them. There will be no more traffickers in the house of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts in that day.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Malachi (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Malachi

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Love for Israel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}An oracle. The message of the {\scaps Lord} to Israel through Malachi.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*I have loved you,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}. \uc1\u8216*But you ask, \uc1\u8220*How have you shown love to us?\uc1\u8221* Was not Esau Jacob\uc1\u8217*s brother?\uc1\u8217* explains the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*yet I loved Jacob,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}but hated Esau, and made his mountains a desolation, and transformed his ancestral land into a wilderness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When Edom says, \uc1\u8220*We are beaten down, but we will return and rebuild the ruined places\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* the {\scaps Lord} of hosts says, \uc1\u8216*They may build, but I will throw down. They will be called, \uc1\u8220*The border land of wickedness,\uc1\u8221* the people against whom the {\scaps Lord} is angry forever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Your own eyes will see this, and you will say, \uc1\u8220*the {\scaps Lord}\uc1\u8217*s greatness reaches beyond the border of Israel.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Against the Priests

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*A son honours his father and servant their master. If I am a father, where is my honour? And if I am a master, where is the one who fears me? So says the {\scaps Lord} to you, priests who despise my name. You ask, \uc1\u8220*How have we despised your name?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You offer on my altar bread that is polluted. You ask, \uc1\u8220*How have we polluted it?\uc1\u8221* Because you say, \uc1\u8220*The table of the {\scaps Lord} is contemptible.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When you offer the blind animal for sacrifice, \uc1\u8220*It doesn\uc1\u8217*t matter!\uc1\u8221* And when you offer the lame and the sick \uc1\u8220*It doesn\uc1\u8217*t matter!\uc1\u8221* Give an animal like that to your governor; will he be pleased with it? Will he receive you favourably?\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now, plead for the favour of God with such an offering, so that he may be gracious to us. \uc1\u8216*Would I receive any of you favourably?\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*If only one of you would shut the temple doors, so that you could not kindle useless fires on my altar! I have no pleasure in you,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*Nor will I accept an offering from your hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For from the rising of the sun to its setting my name is great among the nations, and in every place they offer to my name a pure offering. For my name is great among the nations,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*But you profane me when you say, \uc1\u8220*The table of the {\scaps Lord} is polluted, and its food is contemptible.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You say also, \uc1\u8220*How tired we are of all this!\uc1\u8221* and you sniff contemptuously at it. You have brought the blind, the lame and the sick as offerings. Should I accept this from your hand?\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Cursed be the cheat, who has in his flock a valuable male, but vows and sacrifices to the Lord a blemished animal! For I am a great king,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*and my name is feared among the nations.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}\uc1\u8216*Now, you priests, this command is for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If you will not hear, and if you do not take it to heart, to give glory to my name,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*Then I will lay a curse on you. I will turn your blessings into curses. Indeed I have already done so, because you pay no attention.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I will punish your descendants! I will spread offal upon your faces, even the offal of your pilgrim feasts, you will be discarded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You will then know that I have sent this command to you, so that my covenant with Levi may be preserved,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*My covenant with him was to give life and peace. I gave them to him so that he might revere me. He revered me, and stood in awe of my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The true instruction was in his mouth, and injustice was not found in his lips; He walked with me in peace and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the priest\uc1\u8217*s lips should keep knowledge, and people should seek the law from his mouth, because he is the messenger of the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*But you have turned aside from that way. You have caused many to stumble in the law. You have corrupted the covenant of Levi,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*So I have I made you contemptible and degraded before all the people, because you have not kept my ways, and have had no respect for me in imparting the law.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Unfaithfulness

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Don\uc1\u8217*t we have all one father? Didn\uc1\u8217*t one God created us? Why do we deal faithlessly with one another, profaning the covenant of our ancestors?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Judah is treacherous, and abominations are committed in Israel and in Jerusalem because Judah has profaned the holy things loved by the {\scaps Lord}, and has married the daughter of a foreign god.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}May the {\scaps Lord} banish from the community of Jacob anyone who does this, anyone awaking, testifying, and making an offering to the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And you also do this: You cover the altar of the {\scaps Lord} with tears, because he doesn\uc1\u8217*t accept the offering any more, doesn\uc1\u8217*t accept it from your hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet you ask, \uc1\u8216*Why?\uc1\u8217* Because the {\scaps Lord} is testifying against you on behalf of the wife you married when you were young. You have been unfaithful to her, even though she is your companion, and your legal wife.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Did not the one God make everyone, so that all both flesh and spirit is his? And what does that one God seek but godly children? Therefore keep watch over your spirit, and let none of you deal faithlessly with the wife of your youth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*A man who divorces or puts away his wife,\uc1\u8217* says {\scaps Lord}, the God of Israel, \uc1\u8216*overwhelms her with cruelty.\uc1\u8217* The {\scaps Lord} of hosts says: \uc1\u8216*Keep watch over your spirit, do not be unfaithful.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Lord\uc1\u8217*s Coming Judgment

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}You have wearied the {\scaps Lord} with your words. You ask, \uc1\u8216*How have we wearied him?\uc1\u8217* By saying, \uc1\u8216*Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of the {\scaps Lord}, and he delights in them.\uc1\u8217* Or, \uc1\u8216*Where is the God of justice?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}\uc1\u8216*I am about to send my messenger and he will clear a path before me: And the {\scaps Lord}, who you are seeking, will suddenly come to his temple. The messenger of the covenant who you long for is already coming, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But who can endure the day of his coming? And who will stand firm when he appears? He is like a refiner\uc1\u8217*s fire, and like a launderer\uc1\u8217*s soap,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and he will sit as a refiner and purifier. He will purify the descendants of Levi, and refine them like gold and silver, until they are fit to bring offerings to the {\scaps Lord}.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then will the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the {\scaps Lord}, as in the days of old, and as in former years.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*I will come to you in judgment. I will be quick to testify against the sorcerers, adulterers, perjurers, those who cheat workers, or widows, or orphans, deny justice to immigrants, and do not fear me,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*For I, the {\scaps Lord}, do not change; and you have not ceased to be descendants of Jacob.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Paying the Tithe

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*From the days of your ancestors, you have turned aside from my statutes, and you have not kept them. Turn to me and I will turn to you,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}. \uc1\u8216*You say, \uc1\u8220*How should we turn?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Can a human rob God? Yet you robbed me. You ask, \uc1\u8220*How have we robbed you?\uc1\u8221* In tithes and gifts!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You \uc1\u8211* your entire nation \uc1\u8211* are all cursed, because you rob me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, so that there is food in my house. Test me in this way. See if I will not open to you the windows of the sky, and pour you out a blessing, until there is more than enough.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will rebuke for your sakes the devouring locust and he will not destroy your crops, nor will the vine fail to ripen its fruit in the field, says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and all nations will call you happy, for you will be a delightful land,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Future Reward of the Godless and Faithful

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You have said terrible things about me,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord}. \uc1\u8216*You ask, \uc1\u8220*What have we said about you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You have said, \uc1\u8220*It is useless to serve God, and what do we gain from the {\scaps Lord} of hosts by keeping his commands, and walking mournfully in funeral garb before him?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So now we call the proud happy, evildoers thrive: they dare God and escape unharmed.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Such things those who revered the {\scaps Lord} spoke to one another, and the {\scaps Lord} took notice, and a record was written before him of those who revered the {\scaps Lord} and those who keep in mind his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*They will be mine,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*my special possession on that day that I am preparing. I will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Once again my people will see the difference between the righteous and the wicked, between the person who serves God and the person who does not.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}\uc1\u8216*The day is coming that will burn like a furnace, and all the proud and all evildoers will be stubble, and the day that is coming will burn them up,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts, \uc1\u8216*leaving neither root nor branch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But to you who revere my name there will arise the sun of righteousness with healing in its wings, and you will run free like calves let out from their stall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the day when I act you will tread down the wicked, they will be as ashes under the soles of your feet,\uc1\u8217* says the {\scaps Lord} of hosts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Remember the law of Moses my servant, statutes and judgments which I gave him at Horeb for all Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I am about to send to you Elijah the prophet, before the great and terrible day of the {\scaps Lord} comes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He will turn fathers\uc1\u8217* hearts to their sons and sons\uc1\u8217* hearts to their fathers, so that I will not come and strike the earth with judgement.\uc1\u8217*
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Matthew (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Good News According to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Matthew

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Birth, Parentage and Infancy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}A genealogy of Jesus Christ, a descendant of David and Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac of Jacob, Jacob of Judah and his brothers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Judah of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar, Perez of Hezron, Hezron of Aram,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Aram of Aminadab, Aminadab of Nahshon, Nahshon of Salmon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Salmon of Boaz, whose mother was Rahab, Boaz of Obed, whose mother was Ruth, Obed of Jesse,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesse of David the King. David was the father of Solomon, whose mother was Uriah\uc1\u8217*s widow,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Solomon of Rehoboam, Rehoboam of Abijah, Abijah of Asa,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Asa of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat of Joram, Joram of Uzziah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Uzziah of Jotham, Jotham of Ahaz, Ahaz of Hezekiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Hezekiah of Manasseh, Manasseh of Amon, Amon of Josiah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Josiah of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the Exile to Babylon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}After the Exile to Babylon \uc1\u8211* Jechoniah was the father of Salathiel, Salathiel of Zerubbabel,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Zerubbabel of Abiud, Abiud of Eliakim, Eliakim of Azor,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Azor of Zadok, Zadok of Achim, Achim of Eliud,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Eliud of Eleazar, Eleazar of Matthan, Matthan of Jacob,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Jacob of Joseph, the husband of Mary, who was the mother of Jesus, who is called \uc1\u8220*Christ\uc1\u8221*.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So the whole number of generations from Abraham to David is fourteen; from David to the Exile to Babylon fourteen; and from the Exile to Babylon to the Christ fourteen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This is how Jesus Christ was born:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 His mother Mary was engaged to Joseph, but, before the marriage took place, she found herself to be pregnant by the power of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Her husband, Joseph, was a just man and, since he did not want to disgrace her publicly, he resolved to put an end to their engagement privately.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He had been thinking this over, when an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Joseph, son of David,\uc1\u8217* the angel said, \uc1\u8216*do not be afraid to take Mary for your wife, for her child has been conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}She will give birth to a son; name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}All this happened in fulfilment of these words of the Lord through the prophet, where he says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8220*The virgin will conceive and will give birth to a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 \uc1\u8211* a word which means \uc1\u8220*God is with us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When Joseph woke up, he did as the angel of the Lord had directed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He made Mary his wife, but they did not sleep together before the birth of her son; and to this son he gave the name Jesus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}After the birth of Jesus at Bethlehem in Judea, in the reign of King Herod, some astrologers from the East arrived in Jerusalem, asking,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Where is the newborn king of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When King Herod heard of this, he was much troubled, and so too was all Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He called together all the chief priests and teachers of the Law in the nation, and questioned them as to where the Christ was to be born.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*At Bethlehem in Judea,\uc1\u8217* was their answer, \uc1\u8216*for it is said in the prophet \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*And you, Bethlehem in Judah\uc1\u8217*s land,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 are in no way least among the chief cities of Judah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for out of you will come a ruler \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who will shepherd my people Israel.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then Herod secretly sent for the astrologers. He found out from them the time of the appearance of the star.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Sending them to Bethlehem he said, \uc1\u8216*Go and make a careful search for the child. When you have found him, bring word back to me, so that I, too, can go and worship him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The astrologers heard what the king had to say, and then continued their journey. The star which they had seen in the east led them on, until it reached and stood over the place where the child was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At the sight of the star they were filled with joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Entering the house, they saw the child with his mother, Mary, and fell at his feet and worshipped him. Then they opened their treasure chests, and offered to the child presents of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But afterwards, having been warned in a dream not to go back to Herod, they returned to their own country by another road.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}After they had left, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, and said, \uc1\u8216*Get up, take the child and his mother, and seek refuge in Egypt; and stay there until I tell you to return, for Herod is about to search for the child, to put him to death.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Joseph woke up, and taking the child and his mother by night, went into Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and there he stayed until Herod\uc1\u8217*s death. This was in fulfilment of these words of the Lord in the prophet, where he says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Out of Egypt I called my Son.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When Herod found out that the astrologers had tricked him, he flew into a rage. He sent and put to death all the boys in Bethlehem and the whole of that region, who were two years old or under, guided by the time which he had learned from the astrologers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then were fulfilled these words spoken in the prophet Jeremiah, where he says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*A voice was heard in Ramah,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 weeping and mourning loudly;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Rachel, weeping for her children,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 refusing all comfort for they were dead.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But, on the death of Herod, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Get up, take the child and his mother, and go into the Land of Israel, for those who sought to take the child\uc1\u8217*s life are dead.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}He woke up, and taking the child and his mother, went into the Land of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But, hearing that Archelaus had succeeded his father Herod as king of Judea, he was afraid to go back there; and having been warned in a dream, he went into the part of the country called Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}There he settled in the town of Nazareth, in fulfilment of these words in the prophets \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He will be called a Nazarene.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Preparation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}About that time John the Baptist first appeared, proclaiming in the wilderness of Judea:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}John was the one who was spoken of in the prophet Isaiah, where he says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Make ready the way of the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 make his paths straight.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}John\uc1\u8217*s clothes were made of camels\uc1\u8217* hair, with a leather strap round his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}At that time Jerusalem, and all Judea, as well as the whole district of the Jordan, went out to him{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and were baptized by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But when John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to receive his baptism, he said to them, \uc1\u8216*You children of snakes! Who has prompted you to seek refuge from the coming judgment?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let your life, then, prove your repentance;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and do not think that you can say among yourselves \uc1\u8220*Abraham is our ancestor,\uc1\u8221* for I tell you that out of these stones God is able to raise descendants for Abraham!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Already the axe is lying at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that fails to bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I, indeed, baptize you with water to teach repentance; but he who is coming after me is more powerful than I, and I am not fit even to carry his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}His winnowing-fan is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing-floor, and store his grain in the barn, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that cannot be put out.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan, to John, to be baptized by him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But John tried to prevent him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*I need to be baptized by you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*so why have you come to me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*This is the way it should be for now,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*because we should do everything that God requires.\uc1\u8217* So John agreed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}After the baptism of Jesus, and just as he came up from the water, the heavens opened, and he saw the Spirit of God coming down like a dove and resting on him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and from the heavens there came a voice which said, \uc1\u8216*This is my dearly loved son, who brings me great joy.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the devil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And, after he had fasted for forty days and forty nights, he became hungry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The Tempter came to him, and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*If you are God\uc1\u8217*s Son, tell these stones to become loaves of bread.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*It is not on bread alone that a person is to live, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the devil took him to the Holy City, and, placing him on the parapet of the temple, said to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*If you are God\uc1\u8217*s Son, throw yourself down, for scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*He will give his angels commands about you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and on their hands they will lift you up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 so you do not even strike your foot against a stone.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Scripture also says,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus,
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*\uc1\u8220*You must not tempt the Lord your God.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The third time, the devil took Jesus to a very high mountain, and, showing him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendour, said to him:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*All these I will give you, if you will fall at my feet and worship me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Go away, Satan! For scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You must worship the Lord your God, and worship him only.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then the devil left him alone, and angels came and helped him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Work in Galilee

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When Jesus heard that John had been arrested, he returned to Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Afterwards, leaving Nazareth, he went and settled at Capernaum, which is by the side of the sea, within the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}in fulfilment of these words in the prophet Isaiah \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 the land of the Road by the sea, and beyond the Jordan,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with Galilee of the Gentiles \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The people who were living in darkness
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 have seen a great light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and, for those who were living in the shadow-land of death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a light has dawned!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At that time Jesus began to proclaim \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As Jesus was walking along the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers \uc1\u8211* Simon, also known as Peter, and his brother Andrew \uc1\u8211* casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Come and follow me,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*and I will teach you to fish for people.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The two men left their nets at once and followed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Going further on, he saw two other men who were also brothers, James, Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s son, and his brother John, in their boat with their father, mending their nets. Jesus called them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and they at once left their boat and their father, and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Jesus went all through Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and curing every kind of disease and every kind of sickness among the people;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and his fame spread all through Syria. They brought to him all who were ill with any form of disease, or who were suffering pain \uc1\u8211* any who were either possessed by demons, or were lunatic, or paralysed; and he cured them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He was followed by large crowds from Galilee, the district of the Ten Towns, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}On seeing the crowds of people, Jesus went up the hill; and, when he had taken his seat, his disciples came up to him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and he began to teach them, saying:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Blessed are the poor in spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Blessed are the mourners,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they will be comforted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Blessed are the gentle,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they will inherit the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they will be satisfied.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Blessed are the merciful,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they will find mercy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Blessed are the pure in heart,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they will see God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Blessed are the peacemakers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for they will be called children of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Blessed are those who have been persecuted in the cause of righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*Blessed are you when people insult you, and persecute you, and say all kinds of evil lies about you because of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Be glad and rejoice, because your reward in heaven will be great; this is the way they persecuted the prophets who lived before you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You are salt for the world. But if salt becomes tasteless, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, but is thrown away, and trampled underfoot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It is you who are the light of the world. A town that stands on a hill cannot be hidden.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}People do not light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on the lamp-stand, where it gives light to everyone in the house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Let your light so shine before the eyes of others so that, seeing your good actions, they will praise your Father who is in heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Do not think that I have come to do away with the Law or the prophets; I have not come to do away with them, but to complete them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For I tell you, until the heavens and the earth disappear, not even the smallest letter, nor one stroke of a letter, will disappear from the Law until all is done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Whoever, therefore, breaks one of these commandments, even the least of them, and teaches others to do so, will be the least esteemed in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever keeps them, and teaches others to do so, will be esteemed great in the kingdom of heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Indeed I tell you that, unless you obey God\uc1\u8217*s commands better than of the teachers of the Law, and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*You have heard that to our ancestors it was said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must not commit murder,\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*Whoever commits murder will be brought to trial.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But I say to you that anyone who is angry at their brother or sister will be brought to trial; and whoever insults their brother or sister will be brought before the High Council, while whoever calls them a fool will be in danger of the fires of Gehenna.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Therefore, when presenting your gift at the altar, if even there you remember that your brother or sister has something against you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}leave your gift there, before the altar, go and be reconciled to them, first, then come and present your gift.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Be ready to make friends with your opponent, even when you meet them on your way to the court; otherwise they might hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the judicial officer, and you will be thrown into prison.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I tell you, you will not come out until you have paid the last cent.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*You have heard that it was said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must not commit adultery.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But I say to you that anyone who looks at a woman and desires her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}If your right eye causes you to sin, take it out and throw it away. It would be best for you to lose one part of your body, and not to have the whole of it thrown into Gehenna.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And, if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It would be best for you to lose one part of your body, and not to have the whole of it go down to Gehenna.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*It was also said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Let anyone who divorces his wife serve her with a notice of separation.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But I say to you that anyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of some serious sexual sin, leads to her committing adultery; while anyone who marries her after her divorce is guilty of adultery.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Again, you have heard that our ancestors were told \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Do not break your oaths, keep your vows to the Lord.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But I say to you that you must not swear at all, either by heaven, since that is God\uc1\u8217*s throne,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}or by the earth, since that is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, since that is the city of the Great King.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Nor should you swear by your head, since you cannot make a single hair either white or black.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Let your words be simply \uc1\u8220*Yes\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*No\uc1\u8221*; anything beyond this comes from what is evil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*You have heard that it was said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But I say to you that you must not resist those who wrong you; but, if anyone strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other to them also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}If someone sues you for your shirt, let them have your cloak as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}If you are forced to carry a soldier\uc1\u8217*s pack for one mile, carry it two.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Give to anyone who asks and, if someone wants to borrow from you, do not turn them away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}You have heard that it was said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must love your neighbour and hate your enemy.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}But what I tell you is this: love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}so that you may become children of your Father who is in heaven; for he causes his sun to rise on bad and good alike, and sends rain on the righteous and on the unrighteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}For, if you love only those who love you, what reward will you have? Even the tax collectors do this!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}And, if you only welcome your brothers and sisters, what are you doing more than others? Even the Gentiles do this!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}You, then, must become perfect \uc1\u8211* as your heavenly Father is perfect.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}\uc1\u8216*Take care not to perform your religious duties in public in order to be seen by others; if you do, your Father who is in heaven has no reward for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Therefore, when you do acts of charity, do not have a trumpet blown in front of you, as hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets so that people will praise them. There, I tell you, is their reward!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But, when you do acts of charity, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}so that your charity may be secret; and your Father, who sees what is in secret, will reward you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*And, when you pray, you are not to behave as hypocrites do. They like to pray standing in the synagogues and at the corners of the streets, so that people will see them. There, I tell you, is their reward!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But, when one of you prays, they should go into their own room, shut the door, and pray to their Father who dwells in secret; and their Father, who sees what is secret, will reward them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When praying, do not repeat the same words over and over again, as is done by the Gentiles, who think that by using many words they will obtain a hearing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Do not imitate them; for God, your Father, knows what you need before you ask him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You, therefore, should pray like this \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Our Father, who is in heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 may your name be held holy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}your kingdom come, your will be done \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on earth, as in heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Give us today
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the bread that we will need;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and forgive us our wrongdoings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 as we have forgiven those who have wronged us;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and take us not into temptation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but deliver us from evil.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For, if you forgive others their offences, your heavenly Father will forgive you also;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but, if you do not forgive others their offences, not even your Father will forgive your offences.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*And, when you fast, do not put on gloomy looks, as hypocrites do who disfigure their faces so that they may be seen by people to be fasting. That, I tell you, is their reward!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, when one of you fasts, they should anoint their head and wash their face,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}so that they may not be seen by people to be fasting, but by their Father who dwells in secret; and their Father, who sees what is secret, will reward them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Do not store up treasures for yourselves on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But store up treasures for yourselves in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys, and where thieves do not break in or steal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The lamp of the body is the eye. If your eye is unclouded, your whole body will be lit up;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}but, if your eye is diseased, your whole body will be darkened. And, if the inner light is darkness, how intense must that darkness be!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}No one can serve two masters, for either they will hate one and love the other, or else they will attach themselves to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and Money.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*This is why I say to you, Do not be anxious about your life \uc1\u8211* what you can get to eat or drink, or about your body \uc1\u8211* what you can get to wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Look at the wild birds \uc1\u8211* they neither sow, nor reap, nor gather into barns; and yet your heavenly Father feeds them! Aren\uc1\u8217*t you more precious than they?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But which of you, by being anxious, can prolong their life a single moment?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And why be anxious about clothing? Study the wild lilies, and how they grow. They neither toil nor spin;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his splendour was not robed like one of these.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}If God so clothes even the grass of the field, which is living today and tomorrow will be thrown into the oven, won\uc1\u8217*t he much more clothe you, you of little faith?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Do not then ask anxiously \uc1\u8220*What can we get to eat?\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*What can we get to drink?\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*What can we get to wear?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}All these are the things for which the nations are seeking, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But first seek his kingdom and the righteousness that he requires, and then all these things will be added for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will bring its own anxieties. Every day has trouble enough of its own.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}\uc1\u8216*Do not judge and you will not be judged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For, just as you judge others, you will yourselves be judged, and the standard that you use will be used for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your friend\uc1\u8217*s eye, while you pay no attention at all to the plank of wood in yours?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}How will you say to your friend \uc1\u8220*Let me take out the speck from your eye,\uc1\u8221* when all the time there is a plank in your own?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Hypocrite! Take out the plank from your own eye first, and then you will see clearly how to take out the speck from your friend\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Do not give what is sacred to dogs; they will turn and maul you. Do not throw your pearls before pigs; they will trample them underfoot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Ask, and it will be given to you; search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For the person who asks receives, the person who searches finds, and to the door will be opened to the person who knocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Who among you, when their child asks them for bread, will give them a stone,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}or when they ask for a fish, will give them a snake?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If you, then, wicked though you are, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give what is good to those who ask him!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Do to others whatever you would wish them to do to you; for that is the teaching of both the Law and the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Go in by the small gate. The road that leads to destruction is broad and spacious, and many go in by it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For the gate is small, and the road narrow, that leads to life, and there are few who find it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Beware of false teachers \uc1\u8211* people who come to you in the guise of sheep, but at heart they are ravenous wolves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}By the fruit of their lives you will know them. Do people pick grapes from thorn bushes, or figs from thistles?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So, too, every sound tree bears good fruit, while a worthless tree bears bad fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}A sound tree cannot produce bad fruit, nor can a worthless tree bear good fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Every tree that fails to bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So it is by the fruit of their lives that you will know such people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Not everyone who says to me \uc1\u8220*Master! Master!\uc1\u8221* will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}On that day many will say to me \uc1\u8220*Master, Master, was not it in your name that we taught, and in your name that we drove out demons, and in your name that we did many miracles?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And then I will say to them plainly \uc1\u8220*I never knew you. Go from my presence, you who live in sin.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Everyone, therefore, who listens to this teaching of mine and acts on it may be compared to a prudent person, who built their house on the rock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}The rain poured down, the rivers rose, the winds blew and beat on that house, but it did not fall, for its foundations were on the rock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Everyone who listens to this teaching of mine and does not act on it may be compared to a foolish person, who built their house on the sand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The rain poured down, the rivers rose, the winds blew and struck against that house, and it fell with a great crash.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}By the time that Jesus had finished speaking, the crowd was filled with amazement at his teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For he taught them like one who had authority, and not like their teachers of the Law.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}When Jesus had come down from the hill, great crowds followed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He saw a leper who came up, and bowed to the ground before him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Master, if only you are willing, you are able to make me clean.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Stretching out his hand, Jesus touched him, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*I am willing; become clean.\uc1\u8217* Instantly he was made clean from his leprosy;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and then Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Be careful not to say a word to anyone, but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}After Jesus had entered Capernaum, a centurion in the Roman army came up to him, entreating his help.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Sir,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*my manservant is lying ill at my house with a stroke of paralysis, and is suffering terribly.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*I will come and cure him,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Sir,\uc1\u8217* the centurion went on, \uc1\u8216*I am unworthy to receive you under my roof; but only speak, and my manservant will be cured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For I myself am a man under the orders of others, with soldiers under me; and, if I say to one of them \uc1\u8220*Go,\uc1\u8221* he goes, and to another \uc1\u8220*Come,\uc1\u8221* he comes, and to my slave \uc1\u8220*Do this,\uc1\u8221* he does it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Jesus was surprised to hear this, and said to those who were following him, \uc1\u8216*Never I tell you, in any Israelite have I met with such faith as this!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Yes, and many will come in from East and West and take their places beside Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}while the heirs to the kingdom will be banished into the darkness outside; there, there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then Jesus said to the centurion, \uc1\u8216*Go now, and it will be according to your faith.\uc1\u8217* And the man was cured that very hour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Jesus went into Peter\uc1\u8217*s house, he saw Peter\uc1\u8217*s mother-in-law prostrated with fever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}On his taking her hand, the fever left her, and she rose and began to take care of him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In the evening the people brought to Jesus many who were possessed by demons; and he drove out the spirits with a word, and cured all who were ill,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}in fulfilment of these words in the prophet Isaiah \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He took our infirmities on himself, and bore the burden of our diseases.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Seeing a crowd round him, Jesus gave orders to go across.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}A teacher of the Law came up to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Foxes have holes,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and wild birds their nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* said another, who was a disciple, \uc1\u8216*let me first go and bury my father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their dead.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then he got into the boat, followed by his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Suddenly so great a storm came up on the sea, that the waves broke right over the boat. But Jesus was asleep;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and the disciples came and roused him. \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* they cried, \uc1\u8216*save us; we are lost!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*Why are you so timid?\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*You of little faith!\uc1\u8217* Then Jesus rose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and a great calm followed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The men were amazed, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*What kind of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}On getting to the other side \uc1\u8211* the region of the Gadarenes \uc1\u8211* Jesus met two men who were possessed by demons, coming out of the tombs. They were so violent that no one was able to pass that way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Suddenly they shrieked out, \uc1\u8216*What do you want with us, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before our time?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}A long way off, there was a herd of many pigs, feeding;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and the foul spirits began begging Jesus, \uc1\u8216*If you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*Go,\uc1\u8217* he said. The spirits came out, and entered the pigs; and the whole herd rushed down the steep slope into the sea, and died in the water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}At this the men who tended them ran away and went to the town, carrying the news of all that had occurred, and of what had happened to the possessed men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}At the news the whole town went out to meet Jesus, and, when they saw him, they entreated him to go away from their region.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Afterwards Jesus got into a boat, and, crossing over, came to his own city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There some people brought to him a paralysed man on a bed. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, \uc1\u8216*Courage, child! Your sins are forgiven.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then some of the teachers of the Law said to themselves, \uc1\u8216*This man is blaspheming!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Knowing their thoughts, Jesus exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Why do your cherish such wicked thoughts?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Which, I ask, is the easier? \uc1\u8211* to say \uc1\u8220*Your sins are forgiven\uc1\u8221*? Or to say \uc1\u8220*Get up, and walk\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But to show you that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* then he said to the paralysed man \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Get up, take up your bed, and return to your home.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The man got up and went to his home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When the crowd saw this, they were awe-struck, and praised God for giving such power to human beings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As Jesus went along, he saw a man, called Matthew, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217* Matthew got up and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And, later on, when he was having dinner in the house, a number of tax collectors and outcasts came in and took their places at the table with Jesus and his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Why does your teacher eat in the company of tax collectors and outcasts?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On hearing this, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*It is not those who are healthy who need a doctor, but those who are ill.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Go and learn what this means \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I desire mercy, and not sacrifice\uc1\u8221*; for I did not come to call the religious, but the outcast.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then John\uc1\u8217*s disciples came to Jesus, and asked, \uc1\u8216*Why do we and the Pharisees fast while your disciples do not?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Can the groom\uc1\u8217*s friends mourn as long as the groom is with them? But the days will come, when the groom will be taken away from them, and they will fast then.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Nobody ever puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for such a patch tears away from the garment, and a worse tear is made.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Nor do people put new wine into old wine-skins; for, if they do, the skins burst, and the wine runs out, and the skins are lost; but they put new wine into fresh skins, and so both are preserved.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}While Jesus was saying this, a synagogue leader came up and bowed to the ground before him. \uc1\u8216*My daughter,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*has just died; but come and place your hand on her, and she will be restored to life.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Jesus rose and followed him, and his disciples went also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But meanwhile a woman, who had been suffering from haemorrhage for twelve years, came up behind and touched the tassel of his cloak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*If I only touch his cloak,\uc1\u8217* she said to herself, \uc1\u8216*I will get well.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Turning and seeing her, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Courage, daughter! Your faith has delivered you.\uc1\u8217* And at that very moment she became well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When Jesus reached the leader\uc1\u8217*s house, seeing the flute players, and a number of people all in confusion,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}he said, \uc1\u8216*Go away, the little girl is not dead; she is asleep.\uc1\u8217* They began to laugh at him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}but, when the people had been sent out, Jesus went in, and took the little girl\uc1\u8217*s hand, and she rose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The report of this spread through all that part of the country.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}As Jesus was passing on from there, he was followed by two blind men, who kept calling out, \uc1\u8216*Take pity on us, Son of David!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When he had gone indoors, the blind men came up to him; and Jesus asked them, \uc1\u8216*Do you believe that I am able to do this?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*Yes, Master!\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then he touched their eyes, and said, \uc1\u8216*It will be according to your faith.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then their eyes were opened. Jesus sternly cautioned them. \uc1\u8216*See that no one knows of it,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But the men went out, and spread the news about him through all that part of the country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Just as they were going out, some people brought up to Jesus a dumb man who was possessed by a demon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and, as soon as the demon had been driven out, the dumb man spoke. The people were astonished at this, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But the Pharisees said, \uc1\u8216*He drives out the demons by the help of the chief of the demons.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Jesus went round all the towns and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and curing every kind of disease and every kind of sickness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But, when he saw the crowds, his heart was moved with compassion for them, because they were distressed and harassed, like sheep without a shepherd;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and he said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*The harvest is abundant, but the labourers are few.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Therefore pray to the owner of the harvest to send labourers to gather in his harvest.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Calling his twelve Disciples to him, Jesus gave them authority over foul spirits, so that they could drive them out, as well as the power of curing every kind of disease and every kind of sickness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The names of the twelve apostles are these, First Simon, also known as Peter, and his brother Andrew; James the son of Zebedee, and his brother John;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax-gather; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot \uc1\u8211* the apostle who betrayed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}These twelve Jesus sent out as his messengers, after giving them these instructions \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Do not go to the Gentiles, nor enter any Samaritan town,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but make your way rather to the lost sheep of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On your way proclaim that the kingdom of heaven is at hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Cure the sick, raise the dead, make the lepers clean, drive out demons. You have received free of cost, give free of cost.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Do not provide yourselves with gold, or silver, or coins in your purses;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}not even with a bag for the journey, or a change of clothes, or sandals, or even a staff; for the worker is worth his food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Whatever town or village you visit, find out who is worthy in that place, and remain there until you leave.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As you enter the house, greet it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then, if the house is worthy, let your blessing rest on it, but, if it is unworthy, let your blessing return on yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If no one welcomes you, or listens to what you say, as you leave that house or that town, shake off its dust from your feet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I tell you, the doom of the land of Sodom and Gomorrah will be more bearable in the day of judgment than the doom of that town.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Remember, I am sending you out as my messengers like sheep among wolves. So be as wise as snakes, and as blameless as doves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Be on your guard against others, for they will betray you to courts of law, and scourge you in their synagogues;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake so that you may witness for me before them and the nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Whenever they betray you, do not be anxious as to how you will speak or what you will say, for what you will say will be given you at the moment;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for it will not be you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks within you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Brother will betray brother to death, and the father his child; and children will turn against their parents, and cause them to be put to death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and you will be hated by everyone because of me. Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But, when they persecute you in one town, escape to the next; for, I tell you, you will not have come to the end of the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}A student is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It is enough for a student to be treated like his teacher, and a servant like his master. If the head of the house has been called Beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Do not, therefore, be afraid of them. There is nothing concealed which will not be revealed, nor anything hidden which will not become known.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}What I tell you in the dark, say again in the light; and what is whispered in your ear, proclaim on the housetops.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Do not be afraid of those who kill the body, but are unable to kill the soul; rather be afraid of him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Are not two sparrows sold for a one copper coin? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father\uc1\u8217*s knowledge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}While as for you, even the hairs of your head are numbered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Do not, therefore, be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Everyone, therefore, who will publicly acknowledge me, I, too, will acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}but, if anyone publicly disowns me, I, too, will disown him before my Father who is in heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Do not imagine that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have come to bring, not peace, but the sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}A person\uc1\u8217*s enemies will be the members of their own household.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Anyone who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and anyone who loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Anyone who does not take their cross and follow in my steps is not worthy of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The person who has found their life will lose it, while the person who, for my sake, has lost their life will find it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*Anyone who welcomes you is welcoming me; and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming him who sent me as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}The person who welcomes a prophet, because they are a prophet, will receive a prophet\uc1\u8217*s reward; and anyone who welcomes a good person, because they are a good person, will receive a good person\uc1\u8217*s reward.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}And, if anyone gives but a cup of cold water to one of these little ones because they are a disciple, I tell you that they will assuredly not lose their reward.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}After Jesus had finished giving directions to his twelve Disciples, he left that place in order to teach and preach in their towns.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now John had heard in prison what the Christ was doing, and he sent a message by his disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and asked \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Are you \uc1\u8220*the coming one,\uc1\u8221* or are we to look for someone else?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The answer of Jesus to the question was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Go and report to John what you hear and see \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}the blind recover their sight and the lame walk, the lepers are made clean and the deaf hear, the dead, too, are raised to life, and the good news is told to the poor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Blessed is the person who finds no hindrance in me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}While John\uc1\u8217*s disciples were going back, Jesus began to say to the crowds with reference to John,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*What did you go out into the wilderness to look at? A reed waving in the wind? If not, what did you go out to see? A man richly dressed? Why, those who wear rich things are to be found in the courts of kings!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What, then, did you go for? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This is the man of whom scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I am sending my messenger ahead of you, and he will prepare your way before you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I tell you, no one born of a woman has yet appeared who is greater than John the Baptist; and yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}From the time of John the Baptist to this very hour, the kingdom of heaven has been taken by force, and people using force have been seizing it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For the teaching of all the prophets and of the Law continued until the time of John;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and \uc1\u8211* if you are ready to accept it \uc1\u8211* John is himself the Elijah who was destined to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If you have ears, listen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But to what will I compare the present generation? It is like little children sitting in the market-places and calling out to their playmates \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}We have played the flute for you, but you have not danced; We have wailed, but you have not mourned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For, when John came, neither eating nor drinking, people said \uc1\u8220*He has a demon in him\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and now that the Son of Man has come, eating and drinking, they are saying \uc1\u8220*Here is a glutton and a wine-drinker, a friend of tax collectors and outcasts!\uc1\u8221* And yet wisdom is vindicated by her actions.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then Jesus began to reproach the towns in which most of his miracles had been done, because they had not repented,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Alas for you, Chorazin! Alas for you, Bethsaida! For, if the miracles which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Yet, I tell you, the doom of Tyre and Sidon will be more bearable in the day of judgment than yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And you, Capernaum! Will you exalt yourself to heaven? You will be flung down to Hades! For, if the miracles which have been done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have been standing to this day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yet, I tell you, the doom of Sodom will be more bearable in the day of judgment than yours.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}At that same time Jesus uttered the words, \uc1\u8216*I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that, though you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, you have revealed them to the childlike!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Yes, Father, I thank you that this has seemed good to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Everything has been committed to me by my Father; nor does anyone fully know the Son, except the Father, or fully know the Father, except the Son and those to whom the Son may choose to reveal him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Come to me, all you who toil and are burdened, and I will give you rest!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Take my yoke on you, and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble, and you will find rest for your souls;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}About the same time Jesus walked through the cornfields one Sabbath. His disciples were hungry, and began to pick some ears of wheat and eat them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But, when the Pharisees saw this, they said, \uc1\u8216*Look! Your disciples are doing what it is not allowable to do on a Sabbath!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Haven\uc1\u8217*t you read,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*what David did, when he and his companions were hungry \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}how he went into the house of God, and how they ate the consecrated bread, through it was not allowable for him or his companions to eat it, but only for the priests?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And haven\uc1\u8217*t you read in the law that, on the Sabbath, the priest in the Temple break the Sabbath and yet are not guilty?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Here, however, I tell you, there is something greater than the Temple!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Had you learned the meaning of the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,\uc1\u8221* you would not have condemned those who are not guilty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Passing on, Jesus went into their synagogue,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and there he saw a man with a withered hand. Some people asked Jesus whether it was allowable to work a cure on the Sabbath \uc1\u8211* so that they might have a charge to bring against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Which of you, if he had only one sheep, and that sheep fell into a pit on the Sabbath, would not lay hold of it and pull it out?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}How much more precious a person is than a sheep! Therefore it is allowable to do good on the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then he said to the man. \uc1\u8216*Stretch out your hand.\uc1\u8217* The man stretched it out; and it had become as sound as the other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}On coming out, the Pharisees plotted against Jesus, to put him to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Jesus, however, became aware of it, and went away from that place. A number of people followed him, and he cured them all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}but he warned them not to make him known,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}in fulfilment of these words in the prophet Isaiah \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*Here is my chosen servant, who I love and who pleases me! I will breathe my spirit on him, and he will announce a time of judgment to the Gentiles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}He will not contend, nor cry aloud, Neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}a bruised reed he will not break, and a smouldering wick he will not quench, until he has brought the judgment to a victorious issue,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and on his name will the Gentiles rest their hopes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then some people brought to Jesus a possessed man, who was blind and dumb; and he cured him, so that the man who had been dumb both talked and saw.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At this all the people were astounded. \uc1\u8216*Is it possible that this is the son of David?\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But the Pharisees heard of it and said, \uc1\u8216*He drives out demons only by the help of Beelzebul the chief of the demons.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Jesus, however, was aware of what was passing in their minds, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Any kingdom divided against itself becomes a desolation, and any town or household divided against itself will not last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So, if Satan drives Satan out, he must be divided against himself; and how, then, can his kingdom last?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And, if it is by Beelzebul\uc1\u8217*s help that I drive out demons, by whose help is it that your own sons drive them out? Therefore they will themselves be your judges.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But, if it is by the help of the Spirit of God that I drive out demons, then the kingdom of God must already be upon you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}How, again, can anyone get into a strong man\uc1\u8217*s house and carry off his goods, without first securing him? Not until then will he plunder his house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Anyone who is not with me is against me, and the person who does not help me to gather is scattering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Therefore, I tell you, people will be forgiven every sin and slander; but slander against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Whoever speaks against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in the present age, or in the age to come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*You must assume either that both tree and fruit are good, or that both tree and fruit are worthless; since it is by its fruits that a tree is known.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}You children of snakes! How can you, evil as you are, say anything good? For what fills the heart will rise to the lips.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}A good person, from his good stores, produces good things; while an evil person, from his evil stores, produces evil things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}I tell you that for every careless thing that people say, they must answer on the \uc1\u8220*day of judgment.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For it is by your words that you will be acquitted, and by your words that you will be condemned.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}At this point, some teachers of the Law and Pharisees spoke up. \uc1\u8216*Teacher,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*we want to see some sign from you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*It is a wicked and unfaithful generation,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that is asking for a sign, and no sign will be given it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For, just as Jonah was inside the sea-monster three days and three nights, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}At the judgment, the people of Nineveh will stand up with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at Jonah\uc1\u8217*s proclamation; and here is more than a Jonah!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}At the judgment the Queen of the South will rise up with the present generation, and will condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to listen to the wisdom of Solomon; and here is more than a Solomon!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}No sooner does a foul spirit leave a person, than it passes through places where there is no water, in search of rest, and does not find it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Then it says \uc1\u8220*I will go back to the home which I left\uc1\u8221*; but, on coming there, it finds it unoccupied, and swept, and put in order.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in, and make their home there; and the last state of that man proves to be worse than the first. So, too, will it be with this wicked generation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers were standing outside, asking to speak to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Someone told him this, and Jesus replied,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*Who is my mother? And who are my brothers?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Then, stretching out his hands towards his disciples, he said, \uc1\u8216*Here are my mother and my brothers!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}For anyone who does the will of my Father who is in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}That same day, when Jesus had left the house and was sitting by the sea,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}such great crowds gathered round him, that he got into a boat, and sat in it, while all the people stood on the beach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then he told them many truths in parables. \uc1\u8216*The sower,\uc1\u8217* he began, \uc1\u8216*went out to sow; and,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}as they were sowing, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some fell on rocky places, where it had not much soil, and, because the soil wasn\uc1\u8217*t deep, sprang up at once.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}As soon as the sun had risen, it was scorched, and, because their roots were not deep enough, withered away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Some, again, fell into the brambles; but the brambles shot up and choked it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Some, however, fell on good soil, and yielded a return, sometimes one hundred, sometimes sixty, sometimes thirty fold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let those who have ears hear.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Afterwards his disciples came to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Why do you speak to them in parables?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*To you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*the knowledge of the hidden truths of the kingdom of heaven has been imparted, but not to those.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For, to all who have, more will be given, and they will have abundance; but, from all who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}That is why I speak to them in parables, because, though they have eyes, they do not see, and though they have ears, they do not hear or understand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In them is being fulfilled that prophecy of Isaiah which says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You will hear with your ears without ever understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and, though you have eyes, you will see without ever perceiving,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for the mind of this nation has grown dense,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their ears are dull of hearing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 their eyes also have they closed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 otherwise some day they might perceive with their eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with their ears they might hear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in their mind they might understand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and might turn \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I might heal them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for I tell you that many prophets and good people have longed for the sight of the things which you are seeing, yet never saw them, and to hear the things which you are hearing, yet never heard them.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Listen, then, yourselves to the parable of the sower.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When anyone hears the message of the kingdom without understanding it, the evil one comes and snatches away what has been sown in their mind. This is the person meant by the seed which was sown along the path.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}By the seed which was sown on rocky places is meant the person who hears the message, and at once accepts it joyfully;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but, as they have no root, they stand for only a short time; and, when trouble or persecution arises because of the message, they fall away at once.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}By the seed which was sown among the brambles is meant the person who hears the message, but the cares of life and the glamour of wealth completely choke the message, so that it gives no return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But by the seed which was sown on the good ground is meant the person who hears the message and understands it, and really yields a return, sometimes one hundred, sometimes sixty, sometimes thirty fold.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Another parable which Jesus told them was this \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The kingdom of heaven is compared to a person who sowed good seed in their field.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But, while everyone was asleep, their enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and then went away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So, when the blades of corn shot up, and came into ear, the weeds made their appearance also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The owner\uc1\u8217*s servants came to them, and said \uc1\u8220*Was not it good seed that you sowed in your field? Where, then, do the weeds in it come from?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8220*An enemy has done this,\uc1\u8221* was the owner\uc1\u8217*s answer. \uc1\u8220*Do you wish us, then,\uc1\u8221* they asked, \uc1\u8220*to go and gather them together?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*No,\uc1\u8221* said he, \uc1\u8220*because while you are pulling up the weeds you might uproot the wheat with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Let both grow side by side until harvest; and then I will say to the reapers, Gather the weeds together first, and tie them in bundles for burning; but bring all the wheat into my barn.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Another parable which he told them was this \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed, which a person took and sowed in his field.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}This seed is smaller than all other seeds, but, when it has grown up, it is larger than the herbs and becomes a tree, so that \uc1\u8220*the wild birds come and roost in its branches.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}This was another parable which Jesus related \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The kingdom of heaven is like some yeast which a woman took and covered up in three pecks of flour, until the whole had risen.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Of all this Jesus spoke to the crowd in parables; indeed to them he used never to speak at all except in parables,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}in fulfilment of these words in the prophet \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I will speak to them in parables; I will utter things kept secret since the foundation of the world.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then Jesus left the crowd, and went into the house. Presently his disciples came to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}He answered, \uc1\u8216*The sower of the good seed is the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The field is the world. By the good seed is meant the people of the kingdom. The weeds are the wicked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest time is the close of the age, and the reapers are angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}And, just as the weeds are gathered and burnt, so it will be at the close of the age.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather from his kingdom all that hinders and those who live in sin,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and will throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then will the righteous shine, like the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. If you have ears, listen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8216*The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in a field, which a person found and hid again, and then, in their delight, went and sold everything that they had, and bought that field.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}\uc1\u8216*Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of choice pearls.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Finding one of great value, they went and sold everything that they had, and bought it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Or again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net which was cast into the sea, and caught fish of all kinds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}When it was full, they hauled it up on the beach, and sat down and sorted the good fish into baskets, but threw the worthless ones away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}So will it be at the close of the age. The angels will go out and separate the wicked from the righteous,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}and will throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}\uc1\u8216*Have you understood all this?\uc1\u8217* Jesus asked. \uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}Then he added, \uc1\u8216*So every teacher of the Law, who has received instruction about the kingdom of heaven, is like a householder who produces from his stores things both new and old.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}When Jesus had finished these parables, he withdrew from that place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Going to his own part of the country, he taught the people in their synagogue in such a manner that they were deeply impressed. \uc1\u8216*Where did he get this wisdom?\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*and the miracles?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}Isn\uc1\u8217*t he the carpenter\uc1\u8217*s son? Isn\uc1\u8217*t his mother called Mary, and his brothers James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}And his sisters, too \uc1\u8211* are not they all living among us? Where, then did he get all this?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}These things proved a hindrance to their believing in him. But Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*A prophet is not without honour, except in his own country and in his own house.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}He did not work many miracles there, because of their want of faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}At that time Prince Herod heard of the fame of Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and said to his attendants, \uc1\u8216*This must be John the Baptist; he must be risen from the dead, and that is why these miraculous powers are active in him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For Herod had arrested John, put him in chains, and shut him up in prison, to please Herodias, the wife of Herod\uc1\u8217*s brother Philip.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For John had said to him \uc1\u8220*You have no right to be living with her.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet, though Herod wanted to put him to death, he was afraid of the people, because they looked on John as a prophet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But, when Herod\uc1\u8217*s birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced before his guests, and so pleased Herod,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Prompted by her mother, the girl said \uc1\u8220*Give me here, on a dish, the head of John the Baptist.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The king was distressed at this; yet, because of his oath and of the guests at his table, he ordered it to be given her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He had John beheaded in the prison{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and his head was brought on a dish and given to the girl, and she took it to her mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then John\uc1\u8217*s disciples came, and took the body away, and buried it; and went and told Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When Jesus heard of it, he left privately in a boat to a lonely spot. The people, however, heard of his going, and followed him in crowds from the towns on foot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}On getting out of the boat, Jesus saw a great crowd, and his heart was moved at the sight of them; and he cured all the sick among them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}In the evening the disciples came up to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*This is a lonely spot, and the day is now far advanced; send the crowds away so that they can go to the villages, and buy themselves food.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*They need not go away, it is for you to give them something to eat.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*We have nothing here,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*except five loaves and two fish.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Bring them here to me,\uc1\u8217* was his reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus ordered the people to take their seats on the grass; and, taking the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven, and said the blessing, and, after he had broken the loaves, gave them to his disciples; and they gave them to the crowds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Everyone had sufficient to eat, and they picked up enough of the broken pieces that were left to fill twelve baskets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The men who ate were about five thousand in number, without counting women and children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Immediately afterwards Jesus made the disciples get into a boat and cross over in advance of him, while he dismissed the crowds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After dismissing the crowds, he went up the hill by himself to pray; and, when evening fell, he was there alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The boat was by this time some miles from shore, labouring in the waves, for the wind was against her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Three hours after midnight, however, Jesus came towards the disciples, walking on the water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But, when they saw him walking on the water, they were terrified. \uc1\u8216*It is a ghost,\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, and cried out in fear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But Jesus at once spoke to them. \uc1\u8216*Courage!\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*It is I; do not be afraid!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*if it is you, tell me to come to you on the water.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Come.\uc1\u8217* So Peter got down from the boat, and walked on the water, and went towards Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}but, when he felt the wind, he was frightened, and, beginning to sink, cried out, \uc1\u8216*Master! Save me!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Instantly Jesus stretched out his hand, and caught hold of him. \uc1\u8216*You of little faith!\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*Why did you falter?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}When they had got into the boat, the wind dropped.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But the men in the boat threw themselves on their faces before him, and said, \uc1\u8216*You are indeed God\uc1\u8217*s Son.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But the people of that place, recognising Jesus, sent out to the whole country round, and brought to him all who were ill,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}begging him merely to let them touch the tassel of his cloak; and all who touched were made perfectly well.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}Then some Pharisees and teachers of the Law came to Jesus, and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*How is it that your disciples break the traditions of our ancestors? For they do not wash their hands when they eat food.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}His reply was, \uc1\u8216*How is it that you on your side break God\uc1\u8217*s commandments out of respect for your own traditions?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For God said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Honour your father and mother,\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*Anyone who abuses his father or mother shall suffer death,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}but you say \uc1\u8220*Whenever anyone says to his father or mother \uc1\u8216*Whatever of mine might have been of service to you is set apart for God,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}he is in no way bound to honour his father.\uc1\u8221* In this way you have nullified the words of God for the sake of your traditions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Hypocrites! It was well said by Isaiah when he prophesied about you \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*This is a people that honour me with their lips, While their hearts are far removed from me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but vainly do they worship me, For they teach but human precepts.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then Jesus called the people to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Listen, and mark my words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}It is not what enters a person\uc1\u8217*s mouth that defiles them, but what comes out from their mouth \uc1\u8211* that does defile them!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}His disciples came up to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Do you know that the Pharisees were shocked on hearing what you said?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Every plant,\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*that my heavenly Father has not planted will be rooted up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Leave them be; they are but blind guides; and, if one blind person guides another, both of them will fall into a ditch.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Peter spoke up, \uc1\u8216*Explain this saying to us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*What, do even you understand nothing yet?\uc1\u8217* Jesus exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t you see that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the stomach, and is afterwards expelled?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But the things that come out of the mouth proceed from the heart, and it is these that defile a person;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts \uc1\u8211* murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, perjury, slander.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These are the things that defile a person; but eating with unwashed hands does not defile a person.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On going away from that place, Jesus went to the country round Tyre and Sidon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}There, a Canaanite woman of that district came out and began calling to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Take pity on me, Master, Son of David; my daughter is grievously possessed by a demon.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But Jesus did not answer her a word; and his disciples came up and begged him to send her away. \uc1\u8216*She keeps calling out after us,\uc1\u8217* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*I was not sent,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*to anyone except the lost sheep of Israel.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But the woman came, and, bowing to the ground before him, said, \uc1\u8216*Master, help me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*It is not fair,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*to take the children\uc1\u8217*s food and throw it to dogs.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*for even dogs do feed on the scraps that fall from their owners\uc1\u8217* table.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*Your faith is great,\uc1\u8217* was his reply to the woman, \uc1\u8216*it will be as you wish!\uc1\u8217* And her daughter was cured that very hour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}On leaving that place, Jesus went to the shore of the Sea of Galilee; and then went up the hill, and sat down.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Great crowds of people came to him, bringing with them those who were lame, crippled, blind, or dumb, and many others. They put them down at his feet, and he cured them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and the crowds were astonished, when they saw the dumb talking, the cripples made sound, the lame walking about, and the blind with their sight restored; and they praised the God of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Afterwards Jesus called his disciples to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*My heart is moved at the sight of all these people, for they have already been with me three days and they have nothing to eat; and I am unwilling to send them away hungry; they might faint on the way home.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Where can we,\uc1\u8217* his disciples asked, \uc1\u8216*in a lonely place find enough bread for such a crowd as this?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*How many loaves have you?\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Seven,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*and a few small fish.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Telling the crowd to sit down on the ground,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Jesus took the seven loaves and the fish, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke them, and gave them to the disciples; and the disciples gave them to the crowds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Everyone had sufficient to eat, and they picked up seven baskets full of the broken pieces left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The men who ate were four thousand in number without counting women and children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Then, after dismissing the crowds, Jesus got into the boat, and went to the region of Magadan.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Here the Pharisees and Sadducees came up, and, to test Jesus, requested him to show them some sign from the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*In the evening you say \uc1\u8220*It will be fine weather, for the sky is as red as fire.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But in the morning you say \uc1\u8220*Today it will be stormy, for the sky is as red as fire and threatening.\uc1\u8221* You learn to read the sky; yet you are unable to read the signs of the times!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A wicked and unfaithful generation is asking for a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.\uc1\u8217* So he left them and went away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now the disciples had crossed to the opposite shore, and had forgotten to take any bread.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Presently Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Take care and be on your guard against the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But the disciples began talking among themselves about their having brought no bread.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On noticing this, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Why are you talking among yourselves about your being short of bread, you of little faith?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Don\uc1\u8217*t you yet see, nor remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took away?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nor yet the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many basketfuls you took away?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}How is it that you do not see that I was not speaking about bread? Be on your guard against the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then they understood that he had told them to be on their guard, not against the leaven of bread, but against the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On coming into the region of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus asked his disciples this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who do people say that the Son of Man is?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Some say John the Baptist,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*Others, however, say that he is Elijah, while others again say Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*But you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*who do you say that I am?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To this Simon Peter answered, \uc1\u8216*You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Blessed are you, Simon, Son of Jonah,\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied. \uc1\u8216*For no human being has revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yes, and I say to you, your name is \uc1\u8220*Peter\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* a Rock, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail over it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatever you forbid on earth will be held in heaven to be forbidden, and whatever you allow on earth will be held in heaven to be allowed.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then he charged his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}At that time Jesus Christ began to explain to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem, and undergo much suffering at the hands of the elders, and chief priests, and teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise on the third day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Peter took Jesus aside, and began to rebuke him. \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*please God that will never be your fate!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Jesus, however, turning to Peter, said, \uc1\u8216*Out of my way, Satan! You are a hindrance to me; for you look at things, not as God does, but as person does.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*If anyone wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, and take up their cross, and follow me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake, loses his life will find it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}What good will it do a person to gain the whole world, if he forfeits his life? Or what will a person give that is of equal value with his life?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For the Son of Man is to come in his Father\uc1\u8217*s glory, with his angels, and then he will give to everyone what his actions deserve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I tell you, some of those who are standing here will not know death until they have seen the Son of Man coming into his kingdom.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter, and the brothers James and John, and led them up a high mountain alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There his appearance was transformed before their eyes; his face shown like the sun, and his clothes became as white as the light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}All at once Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Peter, interposing, \uc1\u8216*it is good to be here; if you wish, I will make three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}While he was still speaking, a bright cloud enveloped them, and there was a voice from the cloud that said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*This is my dearly loved son, who brings me great joy; listen to him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The disciples, on hearing this, fell on their faces, greatly afraid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But Jesus came and touched them, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*Rise up, and do not be afraid.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When they raised their eyes, they saw no one but Jesus himself alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As they were going down the mountain side, Jesus gave them this warning \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Do not speak of this vision to anyone, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*How is it,\uc1\u8217* his disciples asked, \uc1\u8216*that our teachers of the Law say that Elijah has to come first?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*Elijah indeed does come,\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*and will restore everything;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and I tell you that Elijah has already come, and people have not recognised him, but have treated him just as they pleased. In the same way, too, the Son of Man is destined to undergo suffering at people\uc1\u8217*s hands.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then the disciples understood that he had spoken to them about John the Baptist.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When they came to the crowd, a man came up to Jesus, and, kneeling down before him, said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Master, take pity on my son, for he is epileptic and suffers terribly; indeed, he often falls into the fire and into the water;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Faithless and perverse generation!\uc1\u8217* Jesus exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*how long must I be among you? How long must I have patience with you? Bring the boy here to me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy; and he was cured from that very hour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Afterwards the disciples came up to Jesus, and asked him privately, \uc1\u8216*Why was it that we could not drive it out?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Because you have so little faith!\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*For, I tell you, if your faith were only like a mustard seed, you could say to this mountain \uc1\u8220*Move from this place to that!\uc1\u8221* and it would be moved; and nothing would be impossible to you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}  Some later manuscripts add: But this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}While Jesus and his disciples were together in Galilee, he said to them, \uc1\u8216*The Son of Man is destined to be betrayed into human hands,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and they will put him to death, but on the third day he will rise.\uc1\u8217* The disciples were greatly distressed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}After they had reached Capernaum, the collectors of the Temple taz came up to Peter, and said, \uc1\u8216*Does not your Master pay the Temple tax?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* answered Peter. But, on going into the house, before he could speak, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*What do you think, Simon? From whom do earthly kings take taxes or tribute? From their sons, or from others?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*From others,\uc1\u8217* answered Peter. \uc1\u8216*Well then,\uc1\u8217* continued Jesus, \uc1\u8216*their sons go free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Still, so we don\uc1\u8217*t offend them, go and throw a line into the sea; take the first fish that rises, open its mouth, and you will find in it a piece of money. Take that, and give it to the collectors for both of us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}On the same occasion the disciples came to Jesus, and asked him, \uc1\u8216*Who is really the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Jesus called a little child to him, and placed it in the middle of them, and then said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Therefore, anyone who will humble themselves like this child \uc1\u8211* that person will be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even one little child like this, is welcoming me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But, if anyone puts temptation in the way of one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be best for them to be sunk in the depths of the sea with a great millstone hung round their neck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Alas for the world because of such temptations! There cannot but be temptations but sorrow awaits the person who does the tempting!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off, and throw it away. It would be better for you to enter life maimed or lame, than to have both hands, or both feet, and be thrown into the fire that never goes out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If your eye causes you to sin, take it out, and throw it away. It would be better for you to enter the life with only one eye, than to have both eyes and be thrown into the fires of Gehenna.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Beware of despising one of these little ones, for in heaven, I tell you, their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}   Some later manuscripts add: For the Son of Man has come to save the lost. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*What think you? If a person owns a hundred sheep, and one of them strays, will the person not leave the ninety-nine on the hills, and go and search for the one that is straying?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And, if they succeed in finding it, I tell you that they rejoice more over that one sheep than over the ninety-nine which did not stray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, too, it is the will of my Father who is in heaven that not one of these little ones should be lost.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*If your brother or sister does wrong, go to them and convince them of their fault when you are both alone. If they listen to you, you have won them over.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But, if they do not listen to you, take with you one or two others, so that on the evidence of two or three witnesses, every word may be put beyond dispute.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If they refuse to listen to them, speak to the church; and, if they also refuse to listen to the church, treat him as you would a Gentile or a tax-gatherer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*I tell you, all that you forbid on earth will be held in heaven to be forbidden, and all that you allow on earth will be held in heaven to be allowed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Again, I tell you that, if but two of you on earth agree as to what they will pray for, whatever it be, it will be granted them by my Father who is in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For where two or three have come together in my name, I am present with them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then Peter came up, and said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Master, how often am I to forgive someone who wrongs me? As many as seven times?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Not seven times, but seventy times seven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Therefore the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When he had begun to do so, one of them was brought to him who owed him ten thousand bags of gold;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and, as he could not pay, his master ordered him to be sold towards the payment of the debt, together with his wife, and his children, and everything that he had.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The servant threw himself down on the ground before him and said \uc1\u8220*Have patience with me, and I will pay you all.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The master was moved with compassion; and he let him go, and forgave him the debt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But, on going out, that same servant came upon one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. Seizing him by the throat, he said \uc1\u8220*Pay what you owe me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}His fellow servant threw himself on the ground and begged for mercy. \uc1\u8220*Have patience with me,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and I will pay you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But the other would not, but went and put him in prison until he should pay his debt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When his fellow servants saw what had happened, they were greatly distressed, and went to their master and laid the whole matter before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So the master sent for the servant, and said to him \uc1\u8220*You wicked servant! When you begged me for mercy, I forgave you the whole of that debt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Shouldn\uc1\u8217*t you, also, to have shown mercy to your fellow servant, just as I showed mercy to you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then his master, in anger, handed him over to the jailers, until he should pay the whole of his debt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}So, also, will my heavenly Father do to you, unless each one of you forgives his brother or sister from your heart.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Journey to Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}At the conclusion of this teaching, Jesus withdrew from Galilee, and went into that district of Judea which is on the other side of the Jordan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Great crowds followed him, and he cured them there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Presently some Pharisees came up to him, and, to test him, said, \uc1\u8216*Has a man the right to divorce his wife for every cause?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Haven\uc1\u8217*t you read,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that at the beginning the Creator \uc1\u8220*made them male and female,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*For this reason a man will leave his father and mother, and be united to his wife, and the man and his wife will become one\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So that they are no longer two, but one. What God himself, then, has yoked together people must not separate.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Why, then,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*did Moses direct that a man should serve his wife with a notice of separation and divorce her?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Moses, owing to the hardness of your hearts,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*permitted you to divorce your wives, but that was not so at the beginning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of some serious sexual sin, and marries another woman, is guilty of adultery.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*If that,\uc1\u8217* said the disciples, \uc1\u8216*is the position of a man with regard to his wife, it is better not to marry.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*It is not everyone,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*who can accept this teaching, but only those who have been enabled to do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Some men are incapable of marriage because they were born that way, or have been made so by other people, while there are others who stay single for the sake of the kingdom of Heaven. Accept this if you can.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then some little children were brought to Jesus, for him to place his hands on them, and pray; but the disciples found fault with those who had brought them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Jesus, however, said, \uc1\u8216*Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of heaven belongs.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So he placed his hands on them, and then went on his way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}A man came up to Jesus, and said, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, what good thing must I do to obtain eternal life?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Why ask me about goodness?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*There is but One who is good. If you want to enter the life, keep the commandments.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*What commandments?\uc1\u8217* asked the man. \uc1\u8216*These,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*\uc1\u8220*You must not kill. You must not commit adultery. You must not steal. You must not say what is false about others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Honour your father and your mother.\uc1\u8221* And \uc1\u8220*You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*I have observed all these,\uc1\u8217* said the young man. \uc1\u8216*What is still wanting in me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*If you wish to be perfect,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*go and sell your property, and give to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}On hearing these words, the young man went away distressed, for he had great possessions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At this, Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*I tell you that a rich person will find it hard to enter the kingdom of heaven!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}I say again, it is easier for a camel to get through a needle\uc1\u8217*s eye than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of heaven!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}On hearing this, the disciples exclaimed in great astonishment, \uc1\u8216*Who then can possibly be saved?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But Jesus looked at them, and said, \uc1\u8216*With people this is impossible, but with God everything is possible.\uc1\u8217* Then Peter turned and said to Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*But we \uc1\u8211* we left everything, and followed you; what, then, will we have?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that at the new creation, when the Son of Man takes his seat on his throne of glory, you who followed me will be seated on twelve thrones, as judges of the twelve tribes of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or land, for my sake, will receive many times as much, and will gain eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But many who are first now will then be last, and those who are last will be first.{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}For the kingdom of heaven is like an employer who went out in the early morning to hire labourers for his vineyards.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He agreed with the labourers to pay them the standard daily rate of two silver coins, and sent them into his vineyard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On going out again, about nine o\uc1\u8217*clock, he saw some others standing in the marketplace, doing nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8220*You also may go into my vineyard,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and I will pay you what is fair.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So they went. Going out again about midday and about three o\uc1\u8217*clock, he did as before.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When he went out about five, he found some others standing there, and said to them \uc1\u8220*Why have you been standing here all day long, doing nothing?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*Because no one has hired us,\uc1\u8221* they answered. \uc1\u8220*You also may go into my vineyard,\uc1\u8221* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the evening the owner of the vineyard said to his steward \uc1\u8220*Call the labourers, and pay them their wages, beginning with the last, and ending with the first.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now when those who had been hired about five o\uc1\u8217*clock went up, they received two silver coins each.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So, when the first went up, they thought that they would receive more, but they also received two silver coins each;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}at which they began to grumble at their employer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*These last,\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*have done only one hour\uc1\u8217*s work, and yet you have put them on the same footing with us, who have borne the brunt of the day\uc1\u8217*s work, and the heat.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*My friend,\uc1\u8221* was his reply to one of them, \uc1\u8220*I am not treating you unfairly. Didn\uc1\u8217*t you agree with me for two silver coins?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Take what belongs to you, and go. I choose to give to this last man the same as to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Don\uc1\u8217*t I have the right to do as I choose with what is mine? Are you envious because I am generous?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So those who are last will be first, and the first last.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When Jesus was on the point of going up to Jerusalem, he gathered the twelve disciples round him by themselves, and said to them as they were on their way,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Listen! We are going up to Jerusalem; and there the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and teachers of the Law, and they will condemn him to death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and give him up to the Gentiles for them to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify; and on the third day he will rise.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then the mother of Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s sons came to him with her sons, bowing to the ground, and begging a favour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*What is it that you want?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*I want you to say,\uc1\u8217* she replied, \uc1\u8216*that in your kingdom these two sons of mine may sit, one on your right, and the other on your left.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*You do not know what you are asking,\uc1\u8217* was Jesus\uc1\u8217* answer. \uc1\u8216*Can you drink the cup that I am to drink?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*we can.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*You will indeed drink my cup,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*but as to a seat at my right and at my left \uc1\u8211* that is not mine to give, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}On hearing of this, the ten others were very indignant about the two brothers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Jesus, however, called the ten to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*The rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them as you know, and their high officials oppress them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Among you it is not so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}No, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to take the first place among you, must be your slave;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}just as the Son of Man came, not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As they were going out of Jericho, a great crowd followed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Two blind men who were sitting by the roadside, hearing that Jesus was passing, called out, \uc1\u8216*Take pity on us, Master, Son of David!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The crowd told them to be quiet; but the men only called out the louder, \uc1\u8216*Take pity on us, Master, Son of David!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Then Jesus stopped and called them. \uc1\u8216*What do you want me to do for you?\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* they replied, \uc1\u8216*we want our eyes to be opened.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}So Jesus, moved with compassion, touched their eyes, and immediately they recovered their sight, and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Last Days

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}When they had almost reached Jerusalem, having come as far as Bethphage, on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent on two disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Go to the village facing you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and you will immediately find a donkey tethered, with a foal by her side; untie her, and lead her here for me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, if anyone says anything to you, you are to say this \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The Master wants them\uc1\u8221*; and he will send them at once.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}This happened in fulfilment of these words in the prophet \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8220*Say to the people of Zion \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Your King is coming to you, gentle, and riding on a donkey, and on the foal of a beast of burden.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So the disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They led the donkey and the foal back, and, when they had put their cloaks on them, he seated himself on them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The immense crowd of people spread their cloaks in the road, while some cut branches off the trees, and spread them on the road.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The crowds that led the way, as well as those that followed behind, kept shouting, \uc1\u8216*God save the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! God save him from on high!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When he had entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred, and asked \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*Who is this?\uc1\u8217*, to which the crowd replied \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth in Galilee.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Jesus went into the Temple Courts, and drove out all those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers, and the seats of the pigeon-dealers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Scripture says \uc1\u8220*My house will be called a house of prayer\uc1\u8221*; but you are making it a den of robbers.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}While he was still in the Temple Courts, some blind and some lame people came up to him, and he cured them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But, when the chief priests and the teachers of the Law saw the wonderful things that Jesus did, and the boys who were calling out in the Temple Courts \uc1\u8216*God save the Son of David!\uc1\u8217*, they were indignant,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do you hear what these boys are saying?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but did you never read the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings you have called forth perfect praise\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then he left them, and went out of the city to Bethany, and spent the night there.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The next morning, in returning to the city, Jesus became hungry;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and, noticing a solitary fig tree by the roadside, he went up to it, but found nothing on it but leaves. So he said to it, \uc1\u8216*Never again will fruit be gathered off you.\uc1\u8217* And suddenly the fruit tree withered up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When the disciples saw this, they exclaimed in astonishment, \uc1\u8216*How suddenly the fig tree withered up!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*if you have faith, without ever a doubt, you will do what not only what has been done to the fig tree, but, even if you should say to this hill \uc1\u8220*Be lifted up and hurled into the sea!\uc1\u8221* it would be done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And whatever you ask for in your prayers will, if you have faith, be granted you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After Jesus had come into the Temple Courts, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him as he was teaching, and said, \uc1\u8216*What authority have you to do these things? Who gave you this authority?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*I, too,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus in reply, \uc1\u8216*will ask you one question; if you will give me an answer to it, then I, also, will tell you what authority I have to act as I do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It is about John\uc1\u8217*s baptism. What was its origin? Divine or human?\uc1\u8217* But they began arguing among themselves, \uc1\u8216*If we say \uc1\u8220*divine,\uc1\u8221* he will say to us \uc1\u8220*Why then didn\uc1\u8217*t you believe him?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But if we say \uc1\u8220*human,\uc1\u8221* we are afraid of the people, for everyone regards John as a prophet.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So the answer they gave Jesus was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*We do not know.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Then I,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}What do you think of this? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the elder and said \uc1\u8220*Go and work in the vineyard today my son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*Yes, sir,\uc1\u8221* he answered; but he did not go.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then the father went to the second son, and said the same. \uc1\u8220*I will not,\uc1\u8221* he answered; but afterwards he was sorry and went.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Which of the two sons did as his father wished?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*The second,\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* added Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that tax collectors and prostitutes are going into the kingdom of God before you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For when John came to you, walking in the path of righteousness, you did not believe him, but tax collectors and prostitutes did; and yet you, though you saw this, even then were not sorry, nor did you believe him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Listen to another parable. A man, who was an employer, once planted a vineyard, put a fence round it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, and then let it out to tenants and went abroad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When the time for the grape harvest drew near, he sent his servants to the tenants, to receive his share of the produce.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But the tenants seized his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}A second time the owner sent some servants, a larger number than before, and the tenants treated them in the same way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}As a last resource he sent his son to them. \uc1\u8220*They will respect my son,\uc1\u8221* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But the tenants, on seeing his son, said to each other \uc1\u8220*Here is the heir! Come, let us kill him, and get his inheritance.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}So they seized him, and threw him outside the vineyard, and killed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Now, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*Miserable wretches!\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*he will put them to a miserable death, and he will let out the vineyard to other tenants, who will pay him his share of the produce at the proper times.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Then Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*Have you never read in the scriptures? \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The stone which the builders despised \uc1\u8211* has now itself become the cornerstone. This cornerstone has come from the Lord, and is marvellous in our eyes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}That, I tell you, is why the kingdom of God will be taken from you, and given to a nation that does produce the fruit of the kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Yes, and he who falls on this stone will be dashed to pieces, while anyone on whom it falls \uc1\u8211* it will scatter him as dust.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}After listening to these parables, the chief priests and the Pharisees saw that it was about them that he was speaking;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}yet, although eager to arrest him, they were afraid of the crowds, who regarded him as a prophet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}Once more Jesus spoke to them in parables.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*The kingdom of heaven,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*may be compared to a king who gave a banquet in honour of his son\uc1\u8217*s wedding.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He sent his servants to call those who had been invited to the banquet, but they were unwilling to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A second time he sent some servants, with orders to say to those who had been invited \uc1\u8220*I have prepared my meal, my cattle and fat beasts are killed and everything is ready; come to the banquet.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They, however, took no notice, but went off, one to their farm, another to their business;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}while the rest, seizing his servants, ill-treated them and killed them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The king, in anger, sent his troops, put those murderers to death, and set their city on fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then he said to his servants \uc1\u8220*The banquet is prepared, but those who were invited were not worthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So go to the cross-roads, and invite everyone you find to the banquet.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The servants went out into the roads and collected all the people whom they found, whether bad or good; and the bridal-hall was filled with guests.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But, when the king went in to see his guests, he noticed there a man who had not put on a wedding-robe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So he said to him \uc1\u8220*My friend, how is it that you came in here without a wedding-robe?\uc1\u8221* The man was speechless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then the king said to the attendants \uc1\u8220*Tie him hand and foot, and put him out into the darkness outside, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For many are called, but few chosen.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the Pharisees went away and conferred together as to how they might lay a trap for Jesus in the course of conversation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They sent their disciples, with the Herodians, to say to him, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, we know that you are an honest person, and that you teach the way of God honestly, and are not afraid of anyone; for you pay no regard to a person\uc1\u8217*s position.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Tell us, then, what you think. Are we right in paying taxes to the Emperor, or not?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Perceiving their malice, Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Why are you testing me, you hypocrites?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Show me the coin with which the tax is paid.\uc1\u8217* And, when they had brought him a coin,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}he asked, \uc1\u8216*Whose head and title are these?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*The Emperor\uc1\u8217*s,\uc1\u8217* they answered, at which he said to them, \uc1\u8216*Then pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}They wondered at his answer, and left him alone and went away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}That same day some Sadducees came up to Jesus, maintaining that there is no resurrection. Their question was this, \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Teacher, Moses said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*should a man die without children, the man\uc1\u8217*s brother will become the husband of the widow, and raise a family for his brother.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now we had living among us seven brothers; of whom the eldest married and died, and, as he had no family, left his wife for his brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The same thing happened to the second and the third brothers, and indeed to all the seven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The woman herself died last of all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}At the resurrection, then, whose wife will she be out of the seven, all of them having been married to her?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Your mistake,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is due to your ignorance of the scriptures, and of the power of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For at the resurrection there is no marrying or being married, but all who rise are as angels in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}As to the resurrection of the dead, have you not read these words of God \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob\uc1\u8221*? He is not the God of dead people, but of living.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The crowds, who had been listening to him, were greatly struck with his teaching.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When the Pharisees heard that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, they collected together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Then one of them, a Student of the Law, to test him, asked this question \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Teacher, what is the greatest commandment in the Law?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}His answer was, \uc1\u8216*You must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}This is the great first commandment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The second, which is like it, is this \uc1\u8211* You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}On these two commandments hang all the Law and the prophets.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Before the Pharisees separated, Jesus put this question to them \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*David\uc1\u8217*s,\uc1\u8217* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}\uc1\u8216*How is it, then,\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*that David, speaking under inspiration, calls him \uc1\u8220*lord,\uc1\u8221* in the passage \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8220*The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies beneath your feet\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Since, then, David calls him \uc1\u8220*lord,\uc1\u8221* how is he David\uc1\u8217*s son?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}No one could say a word in answer; nor did anyone after that day venture to question him further.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Then Jesus, speaking to the crowds and to his disciples, said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees now occupy the chair of Moses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore practice and lay to heart everything that they preach but do not practice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}While they make up heavy loads and pile them on other people\uc1\u8217*s shoulder\uc1\u8217*s they decline, themselves, to lift a finger to move them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}All their actions are done to attract attention. They widen their phylacteries, and increase the size of their tassels,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and like to have the place of honour at dinner, and the best seats in the synagogues,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and to be greeted in the markets with respect, and to be called \uc1\u8220*Rabbi\uc1\u8221* by everybody.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But do not allow yourselves to be called \uc1\u8220*Rabbi,\uc1\u8221* for you have only one teacher, and you yourselves are all brothers and sisters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And do not call anyone on the earth your \uc1\u8220*Father,\uc1\u8221* for your have only one Father, the heavenly Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nor must you allow yourselves to be called \uc1\u8220*leaders,\uc1\u8221* for you have only one leader, the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The person who wants to be the greatest among you must be your servant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Whoever exalts themselves will be humbled, and whoever humbles themselves will be exalted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You turn the key of the kingdom of heaven in people\uc1\u8217*s faces. For you do not go in yourselves, and do not allow those who try to go in to do so.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}   Some later manuscripts add: Alas for you teachers of the law and Pharisees, hypocrites! You devour widows\uc1\u8217* property, and pray long prayers just for show! This is why you will receive a more severe punishment. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Alas for you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You scour land and sea to make a single convert, and, when they are gained, you make them twice as deserving of Gehenna as you are yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Alas for you, you blind guides! You say \uc1\u8220*if any swear by the Temple, their oath counts for nothing; but, if anyone swears by the gold of the Temple, their oath is binding them\uc1\u8221*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Fools that you are and blind! Which is the more important? The gold? Or the Temple which has given sacredness to the gold?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}You say, too, \uc1\u8220*If anyone swears by the altar, their oath counts for nothing, but, if anyone swears by the offering placed on it, their oath is binding on them\uc1\u8221*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Blind indeed! Which is the more important? The offering? Or the altar which gives sacredness to the offering?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Therefore a person, swearing by the altar, swears by it and by all that is on it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and a person, swearing by the Temple, swears by it and by him who dwells in it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}while a person, swearing by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You pay tithes on mint, fennel, and caraway seed, and have neglected the weightier matters of the Law \uc1\u8211* justice, mercy, and good faith. These last you ought to have put into practice, without neglecting the first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}You blind guides, to strain out a gnat and to swallow a camel!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You clean the outside of the cup and the dish, but inside they are filled with the results of greed and self-indulgence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}You blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and the dish, so that the outside may become clean as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You are like whitewashed tombs, which indeed look fair outside, while inside they are filled with dead people\uc1\u8217*s bones and all kinds of filth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}It is the same with you. Outwardly, and to others, you have the look of religious people, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the monuments of religious people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and say \uc1\u8220*Had we been living in the days of our ancestors, we should have taken no part in their murder of the prophets!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}By doing this you are furnishing evidence against yourselves that you are true children of the people who murdered the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Go on then, finish what your ancestors began!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}You snakes and children of snakes! How can you escape being sentenced to Gehenna?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}That is why I send you prophets, wise people, and teachers of the Law, some of whom you will crucify and kill, and some of whom you will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from town to town;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}so that on your heads may fall every drop of innocent blood split on earth, from the blood of innocent Abel down to that of Zechariah, Barachiah\uc1\u8217*s son, whom you murdered between the Temple and the altar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}All this, I tell you, will come home to the present generation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Jerusalem! Jerusalem! She who slays the prophets and stones the messengers sent to her \uc1\u8211* Oh, how often have I wished to gather your children round me, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you would not come!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Verily, your house is left to you desolate!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}For nevermore, I tell you, will you see me, until you say \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}Leaving the Temple Courts, Jesus was walking away, when his disciples came up to draw his attention to the Temple buildings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Do you see all these things?\uc1\u8217* was his answer. \uc1\u8216*I tell you, not a single stone will be left here on another, which will not be thrown down,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}so, while Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, his disciples came up to him privately and said, \uc1\u8216*Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign of your coming, and of the close of the age.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Jesus replied to them, \uc1\u8216*See that no one leads you astray;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for, many will take my name, and come saying \uc1\u8220*I am the Christ,\uc1\u8221* and will lead many astray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You will hear of wars and rumours of wars; take care not to be alarmed, for such things must occur; but the end is not yet here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All this, however, will be but the beginning of the birth pangs!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When that time comes, they will give you up to persecution, and will put you to death, and you will be hated by all nations because of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And then many will fall away, and will betray one another, and hate one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Many false prophets, also, will appear and lead many astray;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and, owing to the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This good news of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the world as a witness to all nations; and then will come the end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}As soon, then, as you see \uc1\u8220*the Foul Desecration,\uc1\u8221* mentioned by the prophet Daniel, standing in the Holy place,\uc1\u8217* (the reader must consider what this means){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and a man on the housetop must not go down to get the things that are in his house;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}nor must one who is on their farm turn back to get his cloak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Pray, too, that your flight may not take place in winter, nor on a Sabbath;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for that will be a time of great distress, the like of which has not occurred from the beginning of the world down to the present time \uc1\u8211* no, nor ever will again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Had not those days been limited, not a single soul would escape; but for the sake of God\uc1\u8217*s people a limit will be put to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At that time, if anyone should say to you \uc1\u8220*Look! Here is the Christ!\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Here he is!\uc1\u8221*, do not believe it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}for false Christs and false prophets will arise, and will display great signs and marvels, so that, were it possible, even God\uc1\u8217*s people would be led astray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Remember, I have told you beforehand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Therefore, if people say to you \uc1\u8220*He is in the wilderness!\uc1\u8221*, do not go out there; or \uc1\u8220*He is in an inner room!\uc1\u8221*, do not believe it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}for, just as lightning will start from the east and flash across to the west, so will it be with the coming of the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Wherever a dead body lies, there will the vultures flock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Immediately after the distress of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light, the stars will fall from the heavens, and the forces of the heavens will be convulsed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then will appear the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn, when they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the heavens, with power and great glory;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and he will send his angels, with a great trumpet, and they will gather his people round him from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*Learn the lesson taught by the fig tree. As soon as its branches are full of sap, and it is bursting into leaf, you know that summer is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And so may you, as soon as you see all these things, know that he is at your doors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}I tell you, even the present generation will not pass away, until all these things have taken place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But about that day and hour, no one knows \uc1\u8211* not even the angels of heaven, not even the Son \uc1\u8211* but only the Father himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For, just as in the days of Noah, so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}In those days before the flood they went on eating and drinking, marrying and being married, up to the very day on which Noah entered the ark,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}taking not notice until the flood came and swept them one and all away; and so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}At that time, of two men on a farm one will be taken and one left;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}of two women grinding with a hand-mill one will be taken and one left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Therefore watch; for you cannot be sure on what day your Master is coming.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}But this you do know, that, had the owner of the house known at what time of night the thief was coming, they would have been on the watch, and would not have allowed their house to be broken into.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Therefore, you must also prepare, since it is just when you are least expecting him that the Son of Man will come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Who, then is that trustworthy, careful servant, who has been placed by their master over his household, to give them their food at the proper time?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Happy will that servant be whom their master, when he comes home, will find doing this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}I tell you that their master will put them in charge of the whole of his property.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}But, should the servant be a bad servant, and say to themselves \uc1\u8220*My master is a long time in coming,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}and begin to beat their fellow servants, and eat and drink with drunkards,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}that servant\uc1\u8217*s master will come on a day when they do not expect him, and at an hour of which they are unaware,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}and will flog the servant severely, and assign them their place among the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}\uc1\u8216*Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten bridesmaids who took their lamps and went out to meet the groom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Five of them were foolish, and five were prudent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The foolish ones took their lamps, but took no oil with them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}while the prudent ones, besides taking their lamps, took oil in their jars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As the groom was late in coming, they all became drowsy, and slept.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But at midnight a shout was raised \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The groom is coming! Come out to meet him!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then all the bridesmaids woke up and trimmed their lamps,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and the foolish said to the prudent \uc1\u8220*Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But the prudent ones answered \uc1\u8220*No, There may not be enough for you and for us. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy for yourselves.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But while they were on their way to buy it, the groom came; and the bridesmaids who were ready went in with him to the banquet, and the door was shut.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Afterwards the other bridesmaids came. \uc1\u8220*Sir, Sir,\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*open the door to us!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But the groom answered \uc1\u8220*I tell you, I do not know you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore watch, since you know neither the day nor the hour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*For it is as though a man, going on his travels, called his servants, and gave his property into their charge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He gave five bags of gold to one, two to another, and one bag to a third, in proportion to the ability of each. Then he set out on his travels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The servant who had received the five bags of gold went at once and traded with it, and made another five bags.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So, too, the servant who had received the two bags of gold made another two bags.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But the servant who had received the one bag went and dug a hole in the ground, and hid his master\uc1\u8217*s money.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After a long time the master of those servants returned, and settled accounts with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The servant who had received the five bags of gold came up and brought five bags more. \uc1\u8220*Sir,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*you entrusted me with five bags of gold; look, I have made another five bags!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*Well done, good, trustworthy servant!\uc1\u8221* said his master. \uc1\u8220*You have been trustworthy with a small sum; now I will place a large one in your hands; come and share your master\uc1\u8217*s joy!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Then the one who had received the two bags of gold came up and said \uc1\u8220*Sir, you entrusted me with two bags pounds; look, I have made another two!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8220*Well done, good, trustworthy servant!\uc1\u8221* said his master. \uc1\u8220*You have been trustworthy with a small sum; now I will place a large one in your hands; come and share your master\uc1\u8217*s joy!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The man who had received the single bag of gold came up, too, and said \uc1\u8220*Sir, I knew that you were a hard man; you reap where you have not sown, and gather up where you have not winnowed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and, in my fear, I went and hid your money in the ground; look, here is what belongs to you!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*You lazy, worthless servant!\uc1\u8221* was his master\uc1\u8217*s reply. \uc1\u8220*You knew that I reap where I have not sown, and gather up where I have not winnowed?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then you ought to have placed my money in the hands of bankers, and I, on my return, should have received my money, with interest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Therefore,\uc1\u8221* he continued, \uc1\u8220*take away from him the one bag of gold, and give it to the one who has the ten bags.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For, to him who has, more will be given, and he will have abundance; but, as for him who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away from him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}As for the useless servant, put him out into the darkness outside, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*When the Son of Man has come in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will take his seat on his throne of glory;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people \uc1\u8211* just as a shepherd separates sheep from goats \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}placing the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then the king will say to those on his right \uc1\u8220*Come, you who are blessed by my Father, enter into possession of the kingdom prepared for you ever since the beginning of the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For, when I was hungry, you gave me food; when I was thirsty, you gave me drink; when I was a stranger, you took me to your homes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}when I was naked, you clothed me; when I fell ill, you visited me; and when I was in prison, you came to me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Then the righteous will answer \uc1\u8220*Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you? Or thirsty, and give you a drink?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}When did we see you a stranger, and take you to our homes? Or naked, and clothe you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}When did we see you ill, or in prison, and come to you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}And the king will reply \uc1\u8220*I tell you, as often as you did it to one of these my brothers or sisters, however unimportant they seemed, you did it to me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Then he will say to those on his left \uc1\u8220*Go from my presence, accursed, into the permanent fire which has been prepared for the devil and his angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}For, when I was hungry, you gave me no food; when I was thirsty, you gave me no drink;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}when I was a stranger, you did not take me to your homes; when I was naked, you did not clothe me; and, when I was ill and in prison, you did not visit me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Then they, in their turn, will answer \uc1\u8220*Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or ill, or in prison, and did not supply your wants?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}And then he will reply \uc1\u8220*I tell you, as often as you failed to do it to one of these, however unimportant, you failed to do it to me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}And these last will go away into lasting correction, but the righteous into lasting life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}When Jesus had finished teaching all of that, he said to his disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*You know that in two days time the Festival of the Passover will be here; and that the Son of Man is to be given up to be crucified.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the chief priests and the elders of the people met in the house of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and plotted together to arrest Jesus by stealth and put him to death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}but they said, \uc1\u8216*Not during the Festival, or the people may riot.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After Jesus had reached Bethany, and while he was in the house of Simon the leper,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}a woman came up to him with an alabaster jar of very costly perfume, and poured the perfume on his head as he sat at the table.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The disciples were indignant at seeing this. \uc1\u8216*What is this waste for?\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*It could have been sold for a large sum, and the money given to poor people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Why are you troubling the woman?\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, when he noticed it. \uc1\u8216*For this is a beautiful deed that she has done to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In pouring this perfume on my body, she prepares me for my burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I tell you, wherever, in the whole world, this good news is proclaimed, what this woman has done will be told in memory of her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was then that one of the Twelve, named Judas Iscariot, made his way to the chief priests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and said \uc1\u8216*What are you willing to give me, if I betray Jesus to you?\uc1\u8217* The Priests counted him out thirty pieces of silver as payment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So from that time Judas looked for an opportunity to betray Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}On the first day of the Festival of the unleavened bread, the disciples came up to Jesus, and said, \uc1\u8216*Where do you wish us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Go into the city to a certain man,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*and say to him \uc1\u8220*The teacher says \uc1\u8211* My time is near. I will keep the Passover with my disciples at your house.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The disciples did as Jesus directed them, and prepared the Passover.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In the evening Jesus took his place with the twelve disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and, while they were eating, he said, \uc1\u8216*I tell you that one of you will betray me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}In great grief they began to say to him, one by one, \uc1\u8216*Can it be I, Master?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*The one who dipped his bread beside me in the dish,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is the one who will betray me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}True, the Son of Man must go, as scripture says of him, yet alas for that man by whom the Son of Man is being betrayed! For that man it would be better never to have been born!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Judas, who was betraying him, turned to him and said, \uc1\u8216*Can it be I, Rabbi?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*It is,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}While they were eating, Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the blessing, broke it and, as he gave it to his disciples, said, \uc1\u8216*Take it and eat it; this is my body.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then he took a cup, and, after saying the thanksgiving, gave it to them, with the words, \uc1\u8216*Drink from it, all of you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}for this is my covenant blood, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I tell you that I will never, after this, drink of this juice of the grape, until that day when I will drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}They then sang a hymn, and went out to the Mount of Olives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Even you will all fall away from me tonight. Scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I will strike down the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But, after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*If everyone else falls away from you,\uc1\u8217* Peter answered, \uc1\u8216*I will never fall away!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that this very night, before the cock crows, you will disown me three times!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Even if I must die with you,\uc1\u8217* Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*I will never disown you!\uc1\u8217* All the disciples spoke in the same way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then Jesus came with them to a garden called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Sit down here while I go and pray over there.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to show signs of sadness and deep distress of mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*I am sad at heart,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*sad even to death; wait here and watch with me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Going on a little further, he threw himself on his face in prayer. \uc1\u8216*My Father,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*if it is possible, let me be spared this cup; only, not as I will, but as you will.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then he came to his disciples, and found them asleep. \uc1\u8216*What!\uc1\u8217* he said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*could none of you watch with me for one hour?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Watch and pray so that you don\uc1\u8217*t fall into temptation. True, the spirit is eager, but human nature is weak.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Again, a second time, he went away, and prayed. \uc1\u8216*My Father,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*if I cannot be spared this cup, but must drink it, your will be done!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And coming back again he found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}So he left them, and went away again, and prayed a third time, again saying the same words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Then he came to the disciples, and said, \uc1\u8216*Sleep on now, and rest yourselves. Look \uc1\u8211* my time is close at hand, and the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of wicked people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Up, and let us be going. Look! My betrayer is close at hand.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}And, while he was still speaking, Judas, who was one of the Twelve, came in sight; and with him was a great crowd of people, with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and elders of the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them. \uc1\u8216*The man whom I kiss,\uc1\u8217* he had said, \uc1\u8216*will be the one; arrest him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}So he went up to Jesus at once, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Welcome, Rabbi!\uc1\u8217* and kissed him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}at which Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Friend, do what you have come for.\uc1\u8217* The men went up, seized Jesus, and arrested him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Suddenly one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and striking the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servant, cut off his ear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8216*Sheathe your sword,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*for all who draw the sword will be put to the sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Do you think that I cannot ask my Father for help, when he would at once send to my aid more than twelve legions of angels?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}But in that case how would the scriptures be fulfilled, which say that this must be?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}Jesus at the same time said to the crowds, \uc1\u8216*Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me? I have sat teaching day after day in the Temple Courts, and yet you did not arrest me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}The whole of this occurred in fulfilment of the prophetic scriptures. Then the disciples all forsook him and fled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the teachers of the Law and elders had assembled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}Peter followed him at a distance as far as the high priest\uc1\u8217*s courtyard, to see the outcome.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}Meanwhile the chief priests and the whole of the High Council were trying to get such false evidence against Jesus, as would warrant putting him to death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}but they did not find any, although many came forward with false evidence. Later on, however, two men came forward and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}\uc1\u8216*This man said \uc1\u8220*I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}Then the high priest stood up, and said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Have you no answer? What is this evidence which these men are giving against you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}But Jesus remained silent. The high priest said to him, \uc1\u8216*I order you, by the living God, to tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}\uc1\u8216*It is true,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Moreover I tell you all that hereafter you will see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Almighty, and coming on the clouds of the heavens.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}Then the high priest tore his robes. \uc1\u8216*This is blasphemy!\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*Why do we want any more witnesses? You have just heard his blasphemy!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}What is your decision?\uc1\u8217* They answered, \uc1\u8216*He deserves death.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}Then they spat in his face, and struck him, while others dealt blows at him, saying as they did so,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}\uc1\u8216*Now play the prophet for us, you Christ! Who was it that struck you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}Peter, meanwhile, was sitting outside in the courtyard; and a maidservant came up to him, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Why, you were with Jesus the Galilean!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}But Peter denied it before them all. \uc1\u8216*I do not know what you mean,\uc1\u8217* he replied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}When he had gone out into the gateway, another maid saw him, and said to those who were there, \uc1\u8216*This man was with Jesus of Nazareth!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}Again he denied it with an oath, \uc1\u8216*I do not know the man!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 73}But soon afterwards those who were standing by came up and said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*You also are certainly one of them; why, even your way of speaking proves it!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 74}Then Peter said, \uc1\u8216*I swear that I do not know the man! May God punish me if I am lying!\uc1\u8217* At that moment a cock crowed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 75}and Peter remembered the words which Jesus had said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Before a cock has crowed, you will disown me three times\uc1\u8221*; and he went outside, and wept bitterly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 27}At daybreak all the chief priests and the elders of the people consulted together against Jesus, to bring about his death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They put him in chains and led him away, and gave him up to the Roman Governor, Pilate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that Jesus was condemned, repented of what he had done, and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*I did wrong in betraying a good man to his death,\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*What has that to do with us?\uc1\u8217* they replied. \uc1\u8216*You must see to that yourself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Judas flung down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and left; and went away and hanged himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The chief priests took the pieces of silver, but they said, \uc1\u8216*We must not put them into the Temple treasury, because they are blood-money.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So, after consultation, they used it to buy the \uc1\u8220*Potter\uc1\u8217*s Field\uc1\u8221* as a burial ground for foreigners,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and that is why that field is called the \uc1\u8220*Field of Blood\uc1\u8221* to this very day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then it was that these words spoken by the prophet Jeremiah were fulfilled \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price set on him by the people of Israel,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and gave them for the potter\uc1\u8217*s field, as the Lord commanded me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Meanwhile Jesus was brought before the Roman Governor. \uc1\u8216*Are you the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217* asked the Governor. \uc1\u8216*It is true,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}While charges were being brought against him by the chief priests and elders, Jesus made no reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then Pilate said to him, \uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t you hear how many accusations they are making against you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet Jesus made no reply \uc1\u8211* not even a single word; at which the Governor was greatly astonished.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Now, at the feast, the Governor was accustomed to grant the people the release of any one prisoner whom they might choose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At that time they had a notorious prisoner called Barabbas.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So, when the people had collected, Pilate said to them, \uc1\u8216*Which do you wish me to release for you? Barabbas? Or Jesus who is called \uc1\u8220*Christ\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For he knew that it was out of jealousy that they had given Jesus up to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}While he was still on the Bench, his wife sent this message to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Do not have anything to do with that good man, for I have been very much troubled today in a dream because of him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But the chief priests and elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas, and to kill Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The Governor, however, said to them, \uc1\u8216*Which of these two do you wish me to release for you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Barabbas,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*What then,\uc1\u8217* Pilate asked, \uc1\u8216*should I do with Jesus who is called \uc1\u8220*Christ?\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*Crucify him,\uc1\u8217* they all replied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Why, what harm has he done?\uc1\u8217* he asked. But they kept shouting furiously, \uc1\u8216*Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When Pilate saw that his efforts were unavailing, but that, on the contrary, a riot was beginning, he took some water, and washed his hands in the sight of the crowd, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*I am not answerable for this bloodshed; you must see to it yourselves.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And all the people answered, \uc1\u8216*His blood be on our heads and on our children\uc1\u8217*s!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then Pilate released Barabbas to them, but Jesus he had scourged, and gave him up to be crucified.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}After that, the Governor\uc1\u8217*s soldiers took Jesus with them into the Government house, and gathered the whole garrison round him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They stripped him, and put on him a red military cloak,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and having twisted some thorns into a crown, put it on his head, and a rod in his right hand, and then, going down on their knees before him, they mocked him. \uc1\u8216*Long life to you, king of the Jews!\uc1\u8217* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}They spat at him and, taking the rod, kept striking him on the head;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and, when they had left off mocking him, they took off the military cloak, and put his own clothes on him, and led him away to be crucified.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}As they were on their way out, they came upon a man from Cyrene called Simon, and they compelled him to go with them to carry the cross.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}On reaching a place named Golgotha (a place named from its likeness to a skull),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}they gave him some wine to drink which had been mixed with gall; but after tasting it, Jesus refused to drink it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When they had crucified him, they divided his clothes among them by casting lots.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then they sat down, and kept watch over him there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Above his head they fixed the accusation against him written out \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}At the same time two robbers were crucified with him, one on the right, the other on the left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The passers-by railed at him, shaking their heads as they said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*You who would \uc1\u8220*destroy the Temple and build one in three days,\uc1\u8221* save yourself! If you are God\uc1\u8217*s Son, come down from the cross!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}In the same way the chief priests, with the Teachers of the Law and elders, said in mockery,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*He saved others, but he cannot save himself! He is the \uc1\u8220*king of Israel\uc1\u8221*! Why doesn\uc1\u8217*t he come down from the cross now, then we will believe in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}He has trusted in God; if God wants him, let him deliver him now; for he said \uc1\u8220*I am God\uc1\u8217*s Son.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Even the robbers, who were crucified with him, insulted him in the same way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}After midday a darkness came over all the country, lasting until three in the afternoon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}About three Jesus called out loudly, \uc1\u8216*Eloi, Eloi, lema sabacthani\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* that is to say, \uc1\u8220*My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Some of those standing by heard this, and said, \uc1\u8216*The man is calling for Elijah!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}One of them immediately ran and took a sponge, and, filling it with common wine, put it on the end of a rod, and offered it to him to drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}But the rest said, \uc1\u8216*Wait and let us see if Elijah is coming to save him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn    Some later manuscripts add: However another man took a spear, and pierced his side; and water and blood flowed from it. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But Jesus, uttering another loud cry, gave up his spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Suddenly the Temple curtain was torn in two from top to bottom, the earth shook, the rocks were torn asunder,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}the tombs opened, and the bodies of many of God\uc1\u8217*s people who had fallen asleep rose,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}and they, leaving their tombs, went, after the resurrection of Jesus, into the Holy City, and appeared to many people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}The Roman centurion, and the men with him who were watching Jesus, on seeing the earthquake and all that was happening, became greatly frightened and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*This must indeed have been God\uc1\u8217*s Son!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}There were many women there, watching from a distance, who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee and had been attending on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Among them were Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s sons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}When evening had fallen, there came a rich man from  Arimathea, named Joseph, who had himself become a disciple of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}He went to see Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus. Pilate ordered it to be given him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}So Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen sheet,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}and laid it in his newly made tomb which he had cut in the rock; and, before he left, he rolled a great stone against the entrance of the tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}Mary of Magdala and the other Mary remained behind, sitting in front of the grave.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}The next day \uc1\u8211* that is, the day following the Preparation-day \uc1\u8211* the chief priests and Pharisees came in a body to Pilate, and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}\uc1\u8216*Sir, we remember that, during his lifetime, that impostor said \uc1\u8220*I will rise after three days.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}So order the tomb to be made secure until the third day. Otherwise his disciples may come and steal him, and then say to the people \uc1\u8220*He has risen from the dead,\uc1\u8221* when the latest imposture will be worse than the first.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}\uc1\u8216*You may have a guard,\uc1\u8217* was Pilate\uc1\u8217*s reply. \uc1\u8216*Go and make the tomb as secure as you can.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}So they went and made the tomb secure, by sealing the stone, in presence of the guard.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Risen Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 28}After the Sabbath, as the first day of the week began to dawn, Mary of Magdala and the other Mary had gone to look at the grave,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}when suddenly a great earthquake occurred. For an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone, and seated himself on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}His appearance was as dazzling as lightning, and his clothing was as white as snow;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and, in their terror of him, the men on guard trembled violently and became like dead men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But the angel, addressing the women, said, \uc1\u8216*You need not be afraid. I know that it is Jesus, who was crucified, for whom you are looking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He is not here; for he has risen, as he said he would. Come, and see the place where he was lying;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and then go quickly and say to his disciples \uc1\u8220*He has risen from the dead, and is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him.\uc1\u8221* Remember, I have told you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They left the tomb quickly, in awe and great joy, and ran to tell the news to the disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Suddenly Jesus met them. \uc1\u8216*Welcome!\uc1\u8217* he said. The women went up to him, and clasped his feet, bowing to the ground before him. Then Jesus said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid; go and tell my brothers and sisters to set out for Galilee, and they will see me there.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}While they were still on their way, some of the guard came into the city, and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So they and the elders met and, after holding a consultation, gave a large sum of money to the soldiers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and told them to say that his disciples came in the night, and stole him while they were asleep;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*And should this matter come before the Governor,\uc1\u8217* they added, \uc1\u8216*we will satisfy him, and see that you have nothing to fear.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the soldiers took the money, and did as they were instructed. This story spread widely; the people of Judea still tell it today.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus told them to meet him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, when they saw him, they bowed to the ground before him; although some felt doubtful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then Jesus came up, and spoke to them, saying, \uc1\u8216*All authority in heaven and on the earth has been given to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore go and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and teaching them to lay to heart all the commands that I have given you; and, remember, I myself am with you every day until the close of the age.\uc1\u8217*
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Mark (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Good News According to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Mark

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Preparation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The beginning of the good news about Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It is said in the prophet Isaiah \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I am sending my messenger ahead of you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 he will prepare your way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Prepare the road for the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 make a straight path for him.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}John the Baptizer appeared in the wilderness, proclaiming a baptism on repentance, for the forgiveness of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The whole of Judea, as well as all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, went out to him; and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}John wore clothes made of camels\uc1\u8217* hair, with a leather strap round his waist, and lived on locusts and wild honey;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and he proclaimed \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*After me is coming someone more powerful than I am, and I am not fit even to stoop down and unfasten his sandals.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I have baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now about that time Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Just as he was coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens split open and the Spirit coming down to him like a dove,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and from the heavens came a voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You are my dearly loved son; you bring me great joy.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Immediately afterwards the Spirit drove Jesus out into the wilderness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and among the wild beasts, while the angels helped him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Work in Galilee

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}After John had been arrested, Jesus went to Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*The time has come, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe the good news.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}As Jesus was going along the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Come and follow me,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*and I will teach you to fish for people.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They left their nets at once, and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Going on a little further, he saw James, Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s son, and his brother John, who were in their boat mending the nets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Jesus called them at once, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the crew, and went after him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They walked to Capernaum. On the next Sabbath Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The people were amazed at his teaching, for he taught them like one who had authority, and not like the teachers of the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now there was in their synagogue at the time a man under the power of a foul spirit, who called out,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*What do you want with us, Jesus the Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are \uc1\u8211* the Holy One of God!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But Jesus rebuked the spirit, \uc1\u8216*Be silent! Come out from him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The foul spirit threw the man into a fit, and with a loud cry came out from him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They were all so amazed that they kept asking each other, \uc1\u8216*What is this? What is this, a new kind of teaching? He gives his commands with authority even to the foul spirits, and they obey him!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}His fame spread at once in all directions, through the whole region of Galilee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As soon as they had left the synagogue, they went to the house of Simon and Andrew, along with James and John.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Now Simon\uc1\u8217*s mother-in-law was lying ill with a fever, and they at once told Jesus about her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Jesus went up to her and, grasping her hand, raised her up; the fever left her, and she began to take care of them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}In the evening, after sunset, the people brought to Jesus all who were ill or possessed by demons;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and the whole city was gathered round the door.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Jesus cured many who were ill with various diseases, and drove out many demons, and would not permit them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}In the morning, long before daylight, Jesus got up and went out to a lonely spot, where he began to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But Simon and his companions went out searching for him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and, when they found him, they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Everyone is looking for you!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Let us go somewhere else, into the country towns nearby so that I can make my proclamation in them also; for that was why I came.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}And he went about making his proclamation in their synagogues all through Galilee, and driving out the demons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}One day a leper came to Jesus and, falling on his knees, begged him for help. \uc1\u8216*If only you are willing,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*you are able to make me clean.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Moved with compassion, Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*I am willing; become clean.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Instantly the leprosy left the man, and he became clean;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}and then Jesus, after sternly warning him, immediately sent him away,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Be careful not to say anything to anyone; but go and show yourself to the priest, and make the offerings for your cleansing directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}The man, however, went away, and began to speak about it publicly, and to spread the story so widely, that Jesus could no longer go openly into a town, but stayed outside in lonely places; and people came to him from every direction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Some days later, when Jesus came back to Capernaum, the news spread that he was in a house there;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and so many people collected together, that after a while there was no room for them even round the door; and he began to tell them his message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Some people came, bringing to him a paralysed man, who was being carried by four of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They were unable to get him near to Jesus, because of the crowd, so they removed the roof above Jesus, and, when they had made an opening, they let down the mat on which the paralysed man was lying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, \uc1\u8216*Child, your sins are forgiven.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But some of the teachers of the Law who were sitting there were debating in their minds,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Why does this man speak like this? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins except God?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Jesus, at once intuitively aware that they were debating with themselves in this way, said to them, \uc1\u8216*Why are you debating in your minds about this?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Which is easier? \uc1\u8211* to say to the paralysed man, \uc1\u8220*Your sins are forgiven\uc1\u8221*? Or to say \uc1\u8220*Get up, and take up your mat, and walk\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But so you may know that the Son of Man has power to forgive sins on earth\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* here he said to the paralysed man \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*To you I say, Get up, take up your mat, and return to your home.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The man got up, and immediately took up his mat, and went out before them all; at which they were amazed, and, as they praised God, they said, \uc1\u8216*We have never seen anything like this!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus went out again to the sea; and all the people came to him, and he taught them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}As he went along, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217* Levi got up and followed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Later on he was in his house having dinner, and a number of tax collectors and outcasts took their places at the table with Jesus and his disciples; for many of them were following him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When the teachers of the Law belonging to the party of the Pharisees saw that he was eating in the company of such people, they said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Why does he eat with the tax collectors and outcasts?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Hearing this, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*It is not those who are healthy who need a doctor, but those who are ill. I did not come to call the religious, but the outcast.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now John\uc1\u8217*s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and people came and asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Why is it that John\uc1\u8217*s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, while yours do not?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Can the groom\uc1\u8217*s friends fast, while the groom is with them? As long as they have the groom with them, they cannot fast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But the days will come, when the groom will be taken away from them, and they will fast then \uc1\u8211* when that day comes.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*No one ever sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; if they do, the patch tears away from it \uc1\u8211* the new from the old \uc1\u8211* and a worse tear is made.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And no one ever puts new wine into old wine-skins; if they do, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins are lost. But new wine is put into fresh skins.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}One Sabbath, as Jesus was walking through the cornfields, his disciples began to pick the ears of wheat as they went along.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Look!\uc1\u8217* the Pharisees said to him, \uc1\u8216*why are they doing what is not allowed on the Sabbath?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*Have you never read,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*what David did when he was in need and hungry, he and his companions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}how he went into the house of God, in the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the consecrated bread, which only the priests are allowed to eat, and gave some to his comrades as well?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*The Sabbath was made for people, and not people for the Sabbath;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}so the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}On another occasion Jesus went in to a synagogue, where there was a man whose hand was withered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And they watched Jesus closely, to see if he would cure the man on the Sabbath, so that they might have a charge to bring against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Stand out in the middle,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to the man with the withered hand;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and to the people he said, \uc1\u8216*Is it allowable to do good at the Sabbath \uc1\u8211* or harm? To save a life, or destroy it?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As they remained silent, Jesus looked round at them in anger, grieving at the hardness of their hearts, and said to the man, \uc1\u8216*Stretch out your hand.\uc1\u8217* The man stretched it out; and his hand had become sound.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Immediately on leaving the synagogue, the Pharisees and the Herodians united in laying a plot against Jesus, to put him to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, followed by a great number of people from Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}A great number, hearing of all that he was doing, came to him from Judea, from Jerusalem, from Edom, from beyond the Jordan, and from the country round Tyre and Sidon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So Jesus told his disciples to keep a small boat close by, so that the crowd would not crush him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For he had cured many of them, and so people kept crowding around him, so all who were sick might touch him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The foul spirits, too, whenever they caught sight of him, flung themselves down before him, and screamed out, \uc1\u8216*You are the Son of God\uc1\u8217*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But he repeatedly warned them not to make him known.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus made his way up the hill, and called those whom he wished; and they went to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He appointed twelve \uc1\u8211* whom he also named \uc1\u8220*apostles\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* so that they might be with him, and that he might send them out as his messengers, to preach,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and with power to drive out demons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So he appointed the Twelve \uc1\u8211* Peter (which was the name that Jesus gave to Simon),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John (to whom he gave the name of Boanerges, which means the Thunderers),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and Judas Iscariot, the man who betrayed him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Jesus went into a house; and again a crowd collected, so that they were not even able to eat their food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When his relatives heard of it, they went to take charge of him, for they said that he was out of his mind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The teachers of the Law, who had come down from Jerusalem, said, \uc1\u8216*He has Beelzebul in him! He drives the demons out by the help of their chief.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So Jesus called them to him, and answered them in parables, \uc1\u8216*How can Satan drive out Satan?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When a kingdom is divided against itself, it cannot last;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and when a household is divided against itself, it will not be able to last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So, if Satan is in revolt against himself and is divided, he cannot last \uc1\u8211* his end has come!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*No man who has broken into a strong man\uc1\u8217*s house can carry off his goods, without first tying him up; and not until then will he plunder his house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I tell you that people will be forgiven everything \uc1\u8211* their sins, and all the slanders that they utter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}but whoever slanders the Holy Spirit remains unforgiven to the end; he has to answer for an enduring sin.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}This was said in reply to the charge that he had a foul spirit in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}His mother and his brothers came, and stood outside, and sent to ask him to come to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}There was a crowd sitting round Jesus, and some of them said to him, \uc1\u8216*Look, your mother and your brothers are outside, asking for you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Who is my mother? And my brothers?\uc1\u8217* was his reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then he looked around on the people sitting in a circle round him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Here are my mother and my brothers!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Whoever does the will of God is my brother and sister and mother.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Jesus again began to teach by the sea; and, as an immense crowd was gathering round him, he got into a boat, and sat in it on the sea, while all the people were on the shore at the water\uc1\u8217*s edge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then he taught them many truths in parables; and in the course of his teaching he said to them:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Listen! The sower went out to sow;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and presently, as he was sowing, some of the seed fell along the path; and the birds came, and ate it up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some fell on rocky ground, where it had not much soil, and, because the soil wasn\uc1\u8217*t deep, sprang up at once;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but, when the sun rose, it was scorched, and, because their roots were not deep enough, withered away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Some of the seed fell among brambles; but the brambles shot up and completely choked it, and it yielded no return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Some fell into good soil, and, shooting up and growing, yielded a return, amounting to thirty, sixty, and even a hundred fold.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Let anyone who has ears to hear with hear.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Afterwards, when he was alone, his followers and the Twelve asked him about his parables;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and he said, \uc1\u8216*To you the hidden truth of the kingdom of God has been imparted; but to those who are outside it all teaching takes the form of parables so that \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8220*Though they have eyes, they may see without perceiving; and though they have ears, they may hear without understanding; otherwise some day they might turn and be forgiven.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You do not know the meaning of this parable?\uc1\u8217* he went on, \uc1\u8216*Then how will you understand all the other parables?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The sower sows the message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The people meant by the seed that falls along the path are these \uc1\u8211* where the message is sown, but, as soon as they have heard it, Satan immediately comes and carries away the message that has been sown in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So, too, those meant by the seed sown on the rocky places are the people who, when they have heard the message, at once accept it joyfully;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}but, as they have no root, they stand only for a short time; and so, when trouble or persecution arises because of the message, they fall away at once.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Those meant by the seed sown among the brambles are different; they are the people who hear the message,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}but the cares of life, and the glamour of wealth, and cravings for many other things come in and completely choke the message, so that it gives no return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But the people meant by the seed sown on the good ground are those who hear the message, and welcome it, and yield a return, thirty, sixty, and even a hundred fold.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under the couch, instead of being put on the lamp-stand?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}There is nothing hidden that will not come to light and nothing is concealed that will not be brought into the open.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Let all who have ears to hear with hear.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Take care what you listen to,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*The standard you use will be used for you, and more will be added for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For, to those who have, more will be given; while, from those who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Jesus also said, \uc1\u8216*This is what the kingdom of God is like \uc1\u8211* like a man who has scattered seed on the ground,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and then sleeps by night and rises by day, while the seed is shooting up and growing \uc1\u8211* he knows not how.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The ground bears the crop of itself \uc1\u8211* first the blade, then the ear, and then the full grain in the ear;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}but, as soon as the crop is ready, immediately he puts in the sickle because harvest has come.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jesus also said, \uc1\u8216*To what can we liken the kingdom of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}By what can we illustrate it? Perhaps by the growth of a mustard seed. This seed, when sown in the ground, though it is smaller than all other seeds,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}yet, when sown, shoots up, and becomes larger than any other herb, and puts out great branches, so that even the wild birds can roost in its shelter.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}With many such parables Jesus used to speak to the people of his message, as far as they were able to receive it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}and to them he never used to speak except in parables; but in private to his own disciples he explained everything.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}In the evening of the same day, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Let us go across.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}So, leaving the crowd behind, they took him with them, just as he was, in the boat; and there were other boats with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}A violent squall came on, and the waves kept dashing into the boat, so that the boat was actually filling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Jesus was in the stern asleep on the cushion; and the disciples roused him and cried, \uc1\u8216*Teacher! Is it nothing to you that we are lost?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Jesus rose and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, \uc1\u8216*Hush! Be still!\uc1\u8217* Then the wind dropped, and a great calm followed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*Why are you so timid?\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*Have you no faith yet?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But they were struck with great awe, and said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Who can this be that even the wind and the sea obey him?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}They came to the other side of the sea \uc1\u8211* the region of the Gerasenes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, as soon as Jesus had got out of the boat, he met a man coming out of the tombs, who was under the power of a foul spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and who made his home in the tombs. No one had ever been able to secure him, even with a chain;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for, though he had many times been left secured with fetters and chains, he had snapped the chains and broken the fetters to pieces, and no one could master him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Night and day alike, he was continually shrieking in the tombs and among the hills, and cutting himself with stones.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed to the ground before him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}shrieking out in a loud voice, \uc1\u8216*What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? For God\uc1\u8217*s sake do not torment me!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For Jesus had said, \uc1\u8216*Come out from the man, you foul spirit.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And he asked him, \uc1\u8216*What is your name?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*My name,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*is Legion, for there are many of us;\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and he begged Jesus again and again not to send them away out of that country.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}There was a large herd of pigs close by, feeding on the hillside;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and the spirits begged Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Send us into the pigs so that we can take possession of them.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus gave them leave. They came out, and entered into the pigs; and the herd \uc1\u8211* about two thousand in number \uc1\u8211* rushed down the steep slope into the sea and were drowned in the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then the men who tended them ran away, and carried the news to the town, and to the country round; and the people went to see what had happened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When they came to Jesus, they found the possessed man sitting there, clothed and in his right mind \uc1\u8211* the man who had had the \uc1\u8220*Legion\uc1\u8221* in him \uc1\u8211* and they were awe-struck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then those who had seen it related to them all that had happened to the possessed man, as well as about the pigs;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}so they began to beg Jesus to leave their region.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As Jesus was getting into the boat, the possessed man begged him to let him stay with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But Jesus refused. \uc1\u8216*Go back to your home, to your own people,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and tell them of all that the Lord has done for you, and how he took pity on you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So the man went, and began to proclaim in the district of the Ten Towns all that Jesus had done for him; and everyone was amazed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}By the time Jesus had recrossed in the boat to the opposite shore, a great number of people had gathered to meet him, and were standing by the sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}One of the leaders of the synagogue, whose name was Jairus, came and, as soon as he saw Jesus, threw himself at his feet and begged him repeatedly,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}saying, \uc1\u8216*My little daughter is at death\uc1\u8217*s door. Please come and place your hands on her so that she may recover and live.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So Jesus went with him. A great number of people followed Jesus, and kept pressing round him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile a woman who for twelve years had suffered from haemorrhage,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and undergone much at the hands of many doctors, (spending all she had without obtaining any relief, but, on the contrary, growing worse),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}heard about Jesus, came behind in the crowd, and touched his cloak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*If I can only touch his clothes,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*I will get well!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At once her bleeding stopped, and she felt in herself that she was cured of her affliction.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jesus at once became aware of the power that had gone out from him, and, turning round in the crowd, he said, \uc1\u8216*Who touched my clothes?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*You see the people pressing round you,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed his disciples, \uc1\u8216*and yet you say \uc1\u8220*Who touched me?\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But Jesus looked about to see who had done it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then the woman, in fear and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and threw herself down before him, and told him the whole truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Daughter,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*your faith has delivered you. Go, and peace be with you; be free from your affliction.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Before he had finished speaking, some people from the house of the synagogue leader came and said, \uc1\u8216*Your daughter is dead! Why should you trouble the teacher further?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But Jesus, overhearing what they were saying, said to the synagogue leader, \uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid; only have faith.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And he allowed no one to accompany him, except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Presently they reached the leader\uc1\u8217*s house, where Jesus saw a scene of confusion \uc1\u8211* people weeping and wailing incessantly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Why this confusion and weeping?\uc1\u8217* he said on entering. \uc1\u8216*The little child is not dead; she is asleep.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}They began to laugh at him; but he sent them all out, and then, with the child\uc1\u8217*s father and mother and his companions, went into the room where she was lying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Taking her hand, Jesus said to her, \uc1\u8216*Talitha, koum!\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* which means \uc1\u8220*little girl, I am speaking to you \uc1\u8211* Rise!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The little girl stood up at once, and began to walk about; for she was twelve years old. And, as soon as they saw it, they were overwhelmed with amazement;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}but Jesus repeatedly cautioned them not to let anyone know of it, and told them to give her something to eat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}On leaving that place, Jesus, followed by his disciples, went to his own part of the country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue; and the people, as they listened, were deeply impressed. \uc1\u8216*Where did he get this?\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*and what is this wisdom that has been given him? And these miracles which he is doing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Isn\uc1\u8217*t he the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? And aren\uc1\u8217*t his sisters, too, living here among us?\uc1\u8217* This proved a hindrance to their believing in him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}at which Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*A prophet is not without honour, except in his home town, and among his own relatives, and in his own home.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he could not work any miracle there, beyond placing his hands on a few infirm persons, and curing them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and he wondered at the want of faith shown by the people. Jesus went round the villages, one after another, teaching.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He called the Twelve to him, and began to send them out as his messengers, two and two, and gave them authority over foul spirits.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He instructed them to take nothing but a staff for the journey \uc1\u8211* not even bread, or a bag, or coins in their purse;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but they were to wear sandals, and not to put on a second coat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Whenever you go to stay at a house,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*remain there until you leave that place;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and if a place does not welcome you, or listen to you, as you go out of it shake off the dust that is on the soles of your feet, as a protest against them.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So they set out, and proclaimed the need of repentance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They drove out many demons, and anointed with oil many who were infirm, and cured them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now King Herod heard of Jesus; for his name had become well known. People were saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*John the Baptizer must have risen from the dead, and that is why these miraculous powers are active in him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Others again said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*He is Elijah,\uc1\u8217* and others \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*He is a prophet, like one of the great prophets.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But when Herod heard of him, he said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The man whom I beheaded \uc1\u8211* John \uc1\u8211* he must be risen!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For Herod himself had sent and arrested John, and put him in prison, in chains, to please Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, because Herod had married her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For John had said to Herod \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You have no right to be living with your brother\uc1\u8217*s wife.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Herodias was incensed against John, and wanted to put him to death, but was unable to do so,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}because Herod stood in fear of John, knowing him to be an upright and holy man, and protected him. He had listened to John, but still remained much perplexed, and yet he found pleasure in listening to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}A suitable opportunity, however, occurred when Herod, on his birthday, gave a dinner to his high officials, and his generals, and the foremost men in Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When his daughter \uc1\u8211* that is, the daughter of Herodias \uc1\u8211* came in and danced, she delighted Herod and those who were dining with him. \uc1\u8216*Ask me for whatever you like,\uc1\u8217* the king said to the girl, \uc1\u8216*and I will give it to you\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and he swore to her that he would give her whatever she asked him \uc1\u8211* up to half his kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The girl went out, and said to her mother \uc1\u8216*What must I ask for?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*The head of John the Baptizer,\uc1\u8217* answered her mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So she went in as quickly as possible to the king, and made her request. \uc1\u8216*I want you,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*to give me at once, on a dish, the head of John the Baptist.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The king was much distressed; yet, because of his oath and of the guests at his table, he did not like to refuse her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He immediately dispatched one of his bodyguard, with orders to bring John\uc1\u8217*s head. The man went and beheaded John in the prison,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and, bringing his head on a dish, gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When John\uc1\u8217*s disciples heard of it, they came and took his body away, and laid it in a tomb.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}When the apostles came back to Jesus, they told him all that they had done and all that they had taught.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Come by yourselves privately to some lonely spot,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and rest for a while\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* for there were so many people coming and going that they had not time even to eat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So they set off privately in their boat for a lonely spot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Many people saw them going, and recognised them, and from all the towns they flocked together to the place on foot, and got there before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}On getting out of the boat, Jesus saw a great crowd, and his heart was moved at the sight of them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When it grew late, his disciples came up to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*This is a lonely spot, and it is already late.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Send the people away, so that they may go to the farms and villages around and buy themselves something to eat.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*It is for you to give them something to eat.\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8216*Are we to go and spend almost a year\uc1\u8217*s wages on bread,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*to give them to eat?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*How many loaves have you?\uc1\u8217* he asked, \uc1\u8216*Go, and see.\uc1\u8217* When they had found out, they told him, \uc1\u8216*Five, and two fish.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Jesus directed them to make all the people take their seats on the green grass, in parties;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and they sat down in groups \uc1\u8211* in hundreds, and in fifties.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Taking the five loaves and the two fish, Jesus looked up to heaven, and said the blessing; he broke the loaves into pieces, and gave them to his disciples for them to serve out to the people, and he divided the two fish also among them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Everyone had sufficient to eat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}and they picked up enough broken pieces to fill twelve baskets, as well as some of the fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}The people who ate the bread were five thousand in number.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Immediately afterwards Jesus made his disciples get into the boat, and cross over in advance, in the direction of Bethsaida, while he himself was dismissing the crowd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}After he had taken leave of the people, he went away up the hill to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When evening fell, the boat was out in the middle of the sea, and Jesus on the shore alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Seeing them labouring at the oars \uc1\u8211* for the wind was against them \uc1\u8211* about three hours after midnight Jesus came towards them, walking on the water, intending to join them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}But, when they saw him walking on the water, they thought it was a ghost, and cried out;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}for all of them saw him, and were terrified. But Jesus at once spoke to them. \uc1\u8216*Courage!\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*it is I; do not be afraid!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Then he got into the boat with them, and the wind dropped. The disciples were utterly amazed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}for they had not understood about the loaves, their minds being slow to learn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret, and moored the boat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}But they had no sooner left her than the people, recognising Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}hurried over the whole countryside, and began to carry about on mats those who were ill, wherever they heard he was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}So wherever he went \uc1\u8211* to villages, or towns, or farms \uc1\u8211* they would lay their sick in the market-places, begging him to let them touch only the tassel of his cloak; and all who touched were made well.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}One day the Pharisees and some of the teachers of the Law who had come from Jerusalem gathered round Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They had noticed that some of his disciples ate their food with their hands \uc1\u8220*defiled,\uc1\u8221* by which they meant unwashed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}(For the Pharisees, and indeed all strict Jews, will not eat without first scrupulously washing their hands, holding in this to the traditions of their ancestors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When they come from market, they will not eat without first sprinkling themselves; and there are many other customs which they have inherited and hold to, such as the ceremonial washing of cups, and jugs, and copper pans).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law asked Jesus this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*How is it that your disciples do not follow the traditions of our ancestors, but eat their food with defiled hands?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}His answer was, \uc1\u8216*It was well said by Isaiah when he prophesied about you hypocrites in the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*This is a people who honour me with their lips, while their hearts are far removed from me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but vainly do they worship me, For they teach but human precepts.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You neglect God\uc1\u8217*s commandments and hold to human traditions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Wisely do you set aside God\uc1\u8217*s commandments,\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*to keep your own traditions!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For while Moses said \uc1\u8220*Honour your father and your mother,\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*Let anyone who abuses their father or mother suffer death,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}you say \uc1\u8220*If a person says to their father or mother \uc1\u8216*Whatever of mine might have been of service to you is Corban\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* (which means \uc1\u8220*Set apart for God\uc1\u8221*) \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}why, then you do not allow them to do anything further for their father or mother!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In this way you nullify the words of God by your traditions, which you hand down; and you do many similar things.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Jesus called the people to him again, and said, \uc1\u8216*Listen to me, all of you, and mark my words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}There is nothing external to a person, which by going into them can defile them; but the things that come out of a person are the things that defile them.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}  Some later manuscripts add: Let anyone with ears to hear, listen. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When Jesus went indoors, away from the crowd, his disciples began questioning him about this saying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*What, do even you understand so little?\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t you see that there is nothing external to a person, which by going into a person, can defile them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}because it does not pass into his heart, but into his stomach, and is afterwards got rid of?\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* in saying this Jesus pronounced all food clean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*It is what comes out from a person,\uc1\u8217* he added, \uc1\u8216*that defiles them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for it is from within, out of the hearts of people, that there come evil thoughts \uc1\u8211* sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}greed, wickedness, deceit, indecency, envy, slander, haughtiness, folly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}all these wicked things come from within, and do defile a person.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}On leaving that place, Jesus went to the district of Tyre and Sidon. He went into a house, and did not wish anyone to know it, but could not escape notice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For a woman, whose little daughter had a foul spirit in her, heard of him immediately, and came and threw herself at his feet \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}the woman was a foreigner, from Syrian Phoenicia \uc1\u8211* and she begged him to drive the demon out of her daughter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*Let the children be satisfied first,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*For it is not fair to take the children\uc1\u8217*s food, and throw it to dogs.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8217* she replied. \uc1\u8216*Even the dogs under the table do feed on the children\uc1\u8217*s crumbs.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*For saying that,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*you may go. The demon has gone out of your daughter.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The woman went home, and found the child lying on her bed, and the demon gone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}On returning from the district of Tyre, Jesus went, by way of Sidon, to the Sea of Galilee, across the district of the Ten Towns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Some people brought to him a man who was deaf and almost dumb, and they begged Jesus to place his hand on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Jesus took him aside from the crowd quietly, put his fingers into the man\uc1\u8217*s ears, and touched his tongue with saliva.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then, looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to the man, \uc1\u8216*Ephphatha!\uc1\u8217* which means \uc1\u8220*Be opened.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The man\uc1\u8217*s ears were opened, the string of his tongue was freed, and he began to talk plainly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Jesus insisted on their not telling anyone; but the more he insisted, the more perseveringly they made it known,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and a profound impression was made on the people. \uc1\u8216*He has done everything well!\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*He makes even the deaf hear and the dumb speak!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}About that time, when there was again a great crowd of people who had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him, and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*My heart is moved at the sight of all these people, for they have already been with me three days and they have nothing to eat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and if I send them away to their homes hungry, they will break down on the way; and some of them have come a long distance.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Where will it be possible,\uc1\u8217* his disciples answered, \uc1\u8216*to get sufficient bread for these people in this lonely place?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*How many loaves have you?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*Seven,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus told the crowd to sit down on the ground. Then he took the seven loaves, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke them, and gave them to his disciples to serve out; and they served them out to the crowd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They had also a few small fish; and, after he had said the blessing, he told the disciples to serve out these as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The people had sufficient to eat, and they picked up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There were about four thousand people. Then Jesus dismissed them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Immediately afterwards, getting into the boat with his disciples, Jesus went to the district of Dalmanutha.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Here the Pharisees came out, and began to argue with Jesus, asking him for some sign from the heavens, to test him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Sighing deeply, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Why does this generation ask for a sign? I tell you, no sign will be given it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So he left them to themselves, and, getting into the boat again, went away to the opposite shore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now the disciples had forgotten to take any bread with them, one loaf being all that they had in the boat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So Jesus gave them this warning. \uc1\u8216*Take care,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They began talking to one another about their being short of bread;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, noticing this, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Why are you talking about your being short of bread? Don\uc1\u8217*t you yet see or understand? Are your minds still so slow or comprehension?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Though you have eyes, do you not see? And though you have ears, do you not hear? Don\uc1\u8217*t you remember,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}when I broke up the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets of broken pieces you picked up?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Twelve,\uc1\u8217* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*And when the seven for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of broken pieces did you pick up?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Seven,\uc1\u8217* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Don\uc1\u8217*t you understand now?\uc1\u8217* he repeated.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}They came to Bethsaida. There some people brought a blind man to Jesus, and begged him to touch him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Taking the blind man\uc1\u8217*s hand, Jesus led him to the outskirts of the village, and, when he had put saliva on the man\uc1\u8217*s eyes, he placed his hands on him, and asked him, \uc1\u8216*Do you see anything?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The man looked up, and said, \uc1\u8216*I see the people, for, as they walk about, they look to me like trees.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Jesus again placed his hands on the man\uc1\u8217*s eyes; and the man saw clearly, his sight was restored, and he saw everything with perfect distinctness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Jesus sent him to his home, and said, \uc1\u8216*Do not go even into the village.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Afterwards Jesus and his disciples went into the villages round Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who do people say that I am?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*John the Baptist,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*but others say Elijah, while others say one of the prophets.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*But you,\uc1\u8217* he asked, \uc1\u8216*who do you say that I am?\uc1\u8217* To this Peter replied, \uc1\u8216*You are the Christ.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}At which Jesus charged them not to say this about him to anyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then he began to teach them that the Son of Man must undergo much suffering, and that he must be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and the teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise again after three days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He said all this quite openly. But Peter took Jesus aside, and began to rebuke him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Jesus, however, turning round and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter. \uc1\u8216*Out of my sight, Satan!\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*For you look at things, not as God does, but as people do.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Calling the people and his disciples to him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*If anyone wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, take up their cross, and follow me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For whoever wishes to save their life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake and for the sake of the good news, will lose their life will save it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}What good is it to a person to gain the whole world and forfeit their life?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For what could a person give that is of equal value with their life?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Whoever is ashamed of me and of my teaching, in this unfaithful and wicked generation, of them will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his Father\uc1\u8217*s glory with the holy angels.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he added, \uc1\u8216*that some of those who are standing here will not know death until they have seen the kingdom of God come in power.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and led them up a high mountain alone by themselves. There his appearance was transformed before their eyes,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and his clothes became whiter than any launderer in the whole world could bleach them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And Elijah appeared to them, in company with Moses; and they were talking with Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* said Peter, interposing, \uc1\u8216*it is good to be here; let us make three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For he did not know what to say, because they were much afraid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then a cloud came down and enveloped them; and from the cloud there came a voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*This is my dearly loved son; listen to him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And suddenly, on looking round, they saw that there was now no one with them but Jesus alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As they were going down the mountainside, Jesus cautioned them not to relate what they had seen to anyone, until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They seized on these words and discussed with one another what this \uc1\u8220*rising from the dead\uc1\u8221* meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*How is it,\uc1\u8217* they asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that our teachers of the Law say that Elijah has to come first?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Elijah does indeed come first,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and re-establish everything; and does not scripture speak, with regard to the Son of Man, of his undergoing much suffering and being utterly despised?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I tell you that Elijah has come, and people have treated him just as they pleased, as scripture says of him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When they came to the other disciples, they saw a great crowd round them, and some teachers of the Law arguing with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But, as soon as they saw Jesus, all the people, in great astonishment, ran up and greeted him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*What are you arguing about with them?\uc1\u8217* Jesus asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Teacher,\uc1\u8217* answered a man in the crowd, \uc1\u8216*I brought my son to see you, as he has a spirit in him that makes him mute;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and, wherever it seizes him, it dashes him down; he foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth, and he is pining away. I asked your disciples to drive the spirit out, but they failed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Faithless generation!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Jesus. \uc1\u8216*How long must I be with you? How long must I have patience with you? Bring the boy to me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}They brought him to Jesus; but no sooner did the boy see him than the spirit threw him into convulsions; and he fell on the ground, and rolled about, foaming at the mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*How long has he been like this?\uc1\u8217* Jesus asked the boy\uc1\u8217*s father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*From his childhood,\uc1\u8217* he answered. \uc1\u8216*It has often thrown him into fire and into water to put an end to his life; but, if you can possibly do anything, take pity on us, and help us!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Why say \uc1\u8220*possibly\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied. \uc1\u8216*Everything is possible for one who has faith.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The boy\uc1\u8217*s father immediately cried out, \uc1\u8216*I have faith; help my want of faith!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But, when Jesus saw that a crowd was quickly collecting, he rebuked the foul spirit, \uc1\u8216*Deaf and dumb spirit, it is I who command you. Come out from him and never enter him again.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}With a loud cry the spirit threw the boy into repeated convulsions, and then came out from him. The boy looked like a corpse, so that most of them said that he was dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But Jesus took his hand, and lifted him; and he stood up.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When Jesus had gone indoors, his disciples asked him privately, \uc1\u8216*Why couldn\uc1\u8217*t we drive it out?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*A spirit of this kind,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*can be driven out only by prayer.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Leaving that place, Jesus and his disciples went on their way through Galilee; but he did not wish anyone to know it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}for he was instructing his disciples, and telling them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of his fellow men, and they will put him to death, but, when he has been put to death, he will rise again after three days.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But the disciples did not understand his meaning and were afraid to question him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They came to Capernaum. When Jesus had gone into the house, he asked them, \uc1\u8216*What were you discussing on the way?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But they were silent; for on the way they had been arguing with one another which was the greatest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Sitting down, Jesus called the Twelve and said, \uc1\u8216*If anyone wishes to be first, he must be last of all, and servant of all.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then Jesus took a little child, and placed it in the middle of them. Taking it in his arms, he said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even a little child like this is welcoming me, and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming not me, but him who sent me as his messenger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Teacher,\uc1\u8217* said John, \uc1\u8216*we saw a man driving out demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he did not follow us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*None of you must prevent the man,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*for no one will use my name in working a miracle, and yet find it easy to speak evil of me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}He who is not against us is for us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}If anyone gives you a cup of water because you belong to Christ, I tell you, he will assuredly not lose his reward.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*And, if anyone puts temptation in the way of one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be far better for him if he had been thrown into the sea with a great millstone round his neck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It would be better for you to enter the life maimed, than to have both your hands and go into Gehenna, into the fire that cannot be put out.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}  Some later manuscripts add here or at verse 46: where their worm never dies and the fire is never quenched. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}If your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It would be better for you to enter the life lame, than to have both your feet and be thrown into Gehenna.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}  See the note on verse 44. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}If your eye causes you to sin, tear it out. It would be better for you to enter the kingdom of God with only one eye, than to have both eyes and be thrown into Gehenna,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}where their worm does not die, and the fire is not put out.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}For it is by fire that everyone will be salted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Salt is good, but, if the salt should lose its saltiness, what will you use to season it?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 You must have salt in yourselves, and live at peace with one another.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Journey to Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}On leaving that place, Jesus went into the district of Judea on the other side of the Jordan. Crowds gathered about him again; and again, as usual, he began teaching them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Presently some Pharisees came up and, to test him, asked, \uc1\u8216*Has a husband the right to divorce his wife?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*What direction did Moses give you?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Moses,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*permitted a man to draw up in writing a notice of separation and divorce his wife.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*It was owing to the hardness of your hearts,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that Moses gave you this direction;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but, at the beginning of the Creation, \uc1\u8220*God made them male and female.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*For this reason a man will leave his father and mother,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and the man and his wife will become one;\uc1\u8221* so that they are no longer two, but one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What God himself, then, has yoked together no one must separate.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When they were indoors, the disciples asked him again about this,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and he said, \uc1\u8216*Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman is guilty of adultery against his wife;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and, if the woman divorces her husband and marries another man, she is guilty of adultery.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Some of the people were bringing little children to Jesus, for him to touch them; but the disciples rebuked those who had brought them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When, however, Jesus saw this, he was indignant. \uc1\u8216*Let the little children come to me,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*do not hinder them; for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of God belongs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I tell you, unless a person receives the kingdom of God like a child, they will not enter it at all.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then he embraced the children, and, placing his hands on them, gave them his blessing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As Jesus was resuming his journey, a man came running up to him, and threw himself on his knees before him. \uc1\u8216*Good teacher,\uc1\u8217* he asked, \uc1\u8216*what must I do to gain eternal life?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*Why do you call me good?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*No one is good but God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}You know the commandments \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Do not kill. Do not commit adultery. Do not steal. Do not say what is false about others. Do not cheat. Honour your father and your mother.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Teacher,\uc1\u8217* he replied, \uc1\u8216*I have observed all these from my childhood.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus looked at the man, and his heart went out to him, and he said, \uc1\u8216*There is still one thing wanting in you; go and sell all that you have, and give to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the man\uc1\u8217*s face clouded at these words, and he went away distressed, for he had great possessions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then Jesus looked round, and said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*How hard it will be for people of wealth to enter the kingdom of God!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus said again, \uc1\u8216*My children, how hard a thing it is to enter the kingdom of God!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It is easier for a camel to get through a needle\uc1\u8217*s eye, than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*Then who can be saved?\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed in the greatest astonishment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Jesus looked at them, and answered, \uc1\u8216*With people it is impossible, but not with God; for everything is possible with God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*But we,\uc1\u8217* began Peter, \uc1\u8216*we left everything and have followed you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or land, for my sake and for the good news,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}who will not receive a hundred times as much, even now in the present \uc1\u8211* houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land, though not without persecutions \uc1\u8211* and in the age that is coming, eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But many who are first now will then be last, and the last will be first.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}They were on the road going up to Jerusalem, with Jesus walking in front of them. The disciples were filled with awe, while those who were following behind were overwhelmed with fear. Gathering the Twelve round him once more, Jesus began to tell them what was about to happen to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Listen!\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*We are going up to Jerusalem; and there the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, and they will condemn him to death, and they will give him up to the Gentiles,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}who will mock him, spit on him, and scourge him, and put him to death; and after three days he will rise again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}James and John, the two sons of Zebedee, went to Jesus, and said, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*What do you want me to do for you?\uc1\u8217* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Grant us this,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*to sit, one on your right, and the other on your left, when you come in glory.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*You do not know what you are asking,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to them. \uc1\u8216*Can you drink the cup that I am to drink? Or receive the baptism that I am to receive?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*we can.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*You will indeed drink the cup that I am to drink,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*and receive the baptism that I am to receive,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}but as to a seat at my right or at my left \uc1\u8211* that is not mine to give, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}On hearing of this, the ten others were at first very indignant about James and John.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}But Jesus called the ten to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Those who are regarded as ruling among the Gentiles lord it over them, as you know, and their great men oppress them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}But among you it is not so. No, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and whoever wants to take the first place among you must be the servant of all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}for even the Son of Man came, not be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}They came to Jericho. When Jesus was going out of the town with his disciples and a large crowd, Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the roadside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Hearing that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to call out, \uc1\u8216*Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Many of the people kept telling him to be quiet; but the man continued to call out all the louder, \uc1\u8216*Son of David, take pity on me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Then Jesus stopped. \uc1\u8216*Call him,\uc1\u8217* he said. So they called the blind man. \uc1\u8216*Have courage!\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*Get up; he is calling you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}The man threw off his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}\uc1\u8216*What do you want me to do for you?\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, addressing him. \uc1\u8216*Rabboni,\uc1\u8217* the blind man answered, \uc1\u8216*I want to recover my sight.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8216*You may go,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Your faith has delivered you.\uc1\u8217* Immediately he recovered his sight, and began to follow Jesus along the road.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Last Days

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}When they had almost reached Jerusalem, as far as Bethphage and Bethany, near the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent on two of his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Go to the village facing you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and, as soon as you get there, you will find a foal tethered, which no one has ever ridden; untie it, and bring it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, if anyone says to you \uc1\u8220*Why are you doing that?\uc1\u8221*, say \uc1\u8220*The Master wants it, and will be sure to send it back here at once.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The two disciples went, and, finding a foal tethered outside a door in the street, they untied it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some of the bystanders said to them, \uc1\u8216*What are you doing, untying the foal?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the two disciples answered as Jesus had told them; and they allowed them to go.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then they brought the foal to Jesus, and, when they had laid their cloaks on it, he seated himself on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Many of the people spread their cloaks on the road, while some strewed boughs which they had cut from the fields;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and those who led the way, as well as those who followed, kept shouting, \uc1\u8216*God save him! Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! God save him from on high!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Jesus entered Jerusalem, and went into the Temple Courts; and, after looking round at everything, as it was already late, he went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The next day, after they had left Bethany, Jesus became hungry;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and, noticing a fig tree at a distance in leaf, he went to it to see if by any chance he could find something on it; but, on coming up to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, addressing the tree, he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*May no one ever again eat of your fruit!\uc1\u8217* And his disciples heard what he said.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}They came to Jerusalem. Jesus went into the Temple Courts, and began to drive out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers, and the seats of the pigeon-dealers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and would not allow anyone to carry anything across the Temple Courts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then he began to teach. \uc1\u8216*Does not scripture say,\uc1\u8217* he asked, \uc1\u8216*\uc1\u8220*My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations\uc1\u8221*? But you have made it a den of robbers.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Now the chief priests and the teachers of the Law heard this and began to look for some way of putting Jesus to death; for they were afraid of him, since all the people were greatly impressed by his teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}As soon as evening fell, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}As they passed by early in the morning, they noticed that the fig tree was withered up from the roots.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then Peter recalled what had occurred. \uc1\u8216*Look, Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*the fig tree which you doomed is withered up!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Have faith in God!\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*I tell you that if anyone should say to this hill \uc1\u8220*Be lifted up and hurled into the sea!\uc1\u8221*, without ever a doubt in his mind, but in the faith that what he says will be done, he would find that it would be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And therefore I say to you \uc1\u8220*Have faith that whatever you ask for in prayer is already granted you, and you will find that it will be.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*And, whenever you stand up to pray, forgive any grievance that you have against anyone, so that your Father who is in heaven also may forgive you your offences.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}  Some later manuscripts add: But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your offences. }
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They came to Jerusalem again. While Jesus was walking about in the Temple Courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders came up to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*What authority have you to do these things?\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*Who gave you the authority to do them?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*I will put one question to you,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Answer me that, and then I will tell you what authority I have to act as I do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}It is about John\uc1\u8217*s baptism. Was it of divine or human origin? Answer me that.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}They began arguing together. \uc1\u8216*If we say \uc1\u8220*divine,\uc1\u8221* he will say \uc1\u8220*Why then didn\uc1\u8217*t you believe him?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Yet can we say \uc1\u8220*human\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217* They were afraid of the people, for everyone regarded John as undoubtedly a prophet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}So their answer to Jesus was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*We do not know.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Then I,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Jesus began to speak to them in parables, \uc1\u8216*A man once planted a vineyard, put a fence round it, dug a wine-press, built a tower, and then let it out to tenants and went abroad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants, to receive from them a share of the produce of the grape harvest;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}but they seized him, and beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A second time the owner sent a servant to them; this man, too, the tenants struck on the head, and insulted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He sent another, but him they killed; and so with many others \uc1\u8211* some they beat and some they killed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He had still one son, who was very dear to him; and him he sent to them last of all. \uc1\u8220*They will respect my son,\uc1\u8221* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But those tenants said to one another \uc1\u8220*Here is the heir! Come, let us kill him, and his inheritance will be ours.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So they seized him, and killed him, and threw his body outside the vineyard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and put the tenants to death, and he will let the vineyard to others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Have you never read this passage of scripture? \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The stone which the builders despised has now itself become the cornerstone;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}this cornerstone has come from the Lord, and is marvellous in our eyes.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}After this his enemies were eager to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd; for they saw that it was at them that he had aimed the parable. So they left him alone, and went away.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Afterwards they sent to Jesus some of the Pharisees and Herodians, to set a trap for him in the course of conversation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}These men came to him and said, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, we know that you are an honest man, and are not afraid of anyone, for you pay no regard to a person\uc1\u8217*s position, but teach the way of God honestly; are we right in paying taxes to the Emperor, or not?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Should we pay, or should we not pay?\uc1\u8217* Knowing their hypocrisy, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Why are you testing me? Bring me a coin to look at.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And, when they had brought it, he asked, \uc1\u8216*Whose head and title are these?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*The Emperor\uc1\u8217*s,\uc1\u8217* they said;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*Pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.\uc1\u8217* And they were amazed at him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Next came some Sadducees \uc1\u8211* the men who maintain that there is no resurrection. Their question was this \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Teacher, in our scriptures Moses decreed that, should a man\uc1\u8217*s brother die, leaving a widow but no child, the man should take the widow as his wife, and raise up a family for his brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}There were once seven brothers. The eldest married, but died and left no family;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and the second married his widow, and died without family; and so did the third.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}All the seven died and left no family. The woman herself died last of all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}At the resurrection whose wife will she be, all seven brothers having had her as their wife?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Is not the reason of your mistake,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*your ignorance of the scriptures and of the power of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When people rise from the dead, there is no marrying or being married; but they are as angels in heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*As to the dead, and the fact that they rise, have you never read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the Bush, how God spoke to him saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}He is not God of dead people, but of living. You are greatly mistaken.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then came up one of the teachers of the Law who had heard their discussions. Knowing that Jesus had answered them wisely, he asked him this question, \uc1\u8216*Which commandment is the most important of all?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*The most important,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Hear, Israel; the Lord our God is the one Lord;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and you must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The second is this \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.\uc1\u8221* There is no commandment greater than these.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*Wisely answered, teacher!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the teacher of the Law. \uc1\u8216*It is true, as you say, that there is one God, and that there is no other besides him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and to love him with all one\uc1\u8217*s heart, and with all one\uc1\u8217*s understanding, and with all one\uc1\u8217*s strength, and to love one\uc1\u8217*s neighbour as one loves oneself is far beyond all burnt offerings and sacrifices.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Seeing that he had answered with discernment, Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*You are not far from the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 After that no one ventured to question him further.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}While Jesus was teaching in the Temple Courts, he asked, \uc1\u8216*How is it that the teachers of the Law say that the Christ is to be David\uc1\u8217*s son?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}David said himself, speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The Lord said to my lord: Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies beneath your feet.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}David himself calls him \uc1\u8220*lord,\uc1\u8221* how comes it, then, that he is to be his son?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The mass of the people listened to Jesus with delight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}In the course of his teaching, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*See that you are on your guard against the teachers of the Law, who delight to walk about in long robes, and to be greeted in the streets with respect,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and to have the best seats in the synagogues, and places of honour at dinner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}They are the men who rob widows of their homes, and make a pretence of saying long prayers. Their sentence will be all the heavier.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Then Jesus sat down opposite the chests for the Temple offerings, and watched how the people put money into them. Many rich people were putting in large sums;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}but one poor widow came and put in two small coins, worth very little.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then, calling his disciples to him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*I tell you that this poor widow has put in more than all the others who were putting money into the chests;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}for everyone else put in something from what he had to spare, while she, in her need, put in all she had \uc1\u8211* everything that she had to live on.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}As Jesus was walking out of the Temple Courts, one of his disciples said to him, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, look what fine stones and buildings these are!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Do you see these great buildings?\uc1\u8217* asked Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Not a single stone will be left here on another, which will not be thrown down.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When Jesus had sat down on the Mount of Olives, facing the Temple, Peter, James, John and Andrew questioned him privately,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign when all this is drawing to its close.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jesus began, \uc1\u8216*See that no one leads you astray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Many will take my name, and come saying \uc1\u8220*I am He\uc1\u8221*, and will lead many astray.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*And, when you hear of wars and rumours of wars, do not be alarmed; such things must occur; but the end is not yet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in various places; there will be famines. This will be but the beginning of the birth-pangs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*See to yourselves! They will betray you to courts of law; and you will be taken to synagogues and beaten; and you will be brought up before governors and kings for my sake, so that you can bear witness before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But the good news must first be proclaimed to every nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Whenever they betray you and hand you over for trial, do not be anxious beforehand as to what you will say, but say whatever is given you at the moment; for it will not be you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Brother will betray brother to death, and the father his child; and children will turn against their parents, and cause them to be put to death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and you will be hated by everyone because of me. Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*As soon, however, as you see \uc1\u8220*the Foul Desecration\uc1\u8221* standing where it ought not\uc1\u8217* (the reader must consider what this means) \uc1\u8216*then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and a person on the house-top must not go down, or go in to get anything out of their house:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}nor must one who is on their farm turn back to get their cloak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Pray, too, that this may not occur in winter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For those days will be a time of distress, the like of which has not occurred from the beginning of God\uc1\u8217*s creation until now \uc1\u8211* and never will again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And, had not the Lord put a limit to those days, not a single soul would escape; but, for the sake of God\uc1\u8217*s own chosen people, he did limit them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*And at that time if anyone should say to you \uc1\u8220*Look, here is the Christ!\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8220*Look, there he is!\uc1\u8221*, do not believe it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}for false Christs and false prophets will arise, and display signs and marvels, to lead astray, were it possible, even God\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But see that you are on your guard! I have told you all this beforehand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*In those days, after that time of distress, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}the stars will be falling from the heavens, and the forces that are in the heavens will be convulsed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then will be seen the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and then he will send the angels, and gather his people from the four winds, from one end of the world to the other.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*Learn the lesson taught by the fig tree. As soon as its branches are full of sap, and it is bursting into leaf, you know that summer is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And so may you, as soon as you see these things happening, know that he is at your doors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I tell you that even the present generation will not pass away, until all these things have taken place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*But about that day, or the hour, no one knows \uc1\u8211* not even the angels in heaven, not even the Son \uc1\u8211* but only the Father.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*See that you are on the watch; for you do not know when the time will be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}It is like a man going on a journey, who leaves his home, puts his servants in charge \uc1\u8211* each having their special duty \uc1\u8211* and orders the porter to watch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Therefore watch, for you cannot be sure when the Master of the house is coming \uc1\u8211* whether in the evening, at midnight, at daybreak, or in the morning \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}otherwise he might come suddenly and find you asleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And what I say to you I say to all \uc1\u8211* Watch!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}It was now two days before the Festival of the Passover and the unleavened bread. The chief priests and the teachers of the Law were looking for an opportunity to arrest Jesus by stealth, and to put him to death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for they said, \uc1\u8216*Not during the Festival, or the people may riot.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When Jesus was still at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, while he was sitting at the table, a woman came with an alabaster jar of choice spikenard perfume of great value. She broke the jar, and poured the perfume on his head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Some of those who were present said to one another indignantly, \uc1\u8216*Why has the perfume been wasted like this?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}This perfume could have been sold for more than a year\uc1\u8217*s wages, and the money given to the poor.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Leave her alone,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, as they began to find fault with her, \uc1\u8216*why are you troubling her? This is a beautiful deed that she has done for me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You always have the poor with you, and whenever you wish you can do good to them; but you will not always have me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}She has done what she could; she has perfumed my body beforehand for my burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And I tell you, wherever, in the whole world, the good news is proclaimed, what this woman has done will be told in memory of her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}After this, Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests, to betray Jesus to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They were glad to hear what he said, and promised to pay him. So he began looking for a good opportunity to betray Jesus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On the first day of the Festival of the unleavened bread, when it was customary to kill the Passover lambs, his disciples said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Where do you wish us to go and make preparations for your eating the Passover?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus sent forward two of his disciples and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Go into the city, and there a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you; follow him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and, wherever he goes in, say to the owner of the house \uc1\u8220*The teacher says \uc1\u8211* Where is my room where I am to eat the Passover with my disciples?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He will himself show you a large upstairs room, set out ready; and there make preparations for us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So the disciples set out and went into the city, and found everything just as Jesus had told them; and they prepared the Passover.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In the evening he went there with the Twelve,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and when they had taken their places and were eating, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*I tell you that one of you is going to betray me \uc1\u8211* one who is eating with me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They were grieved at this, and began to say to him, one after another, \uc1\u8216*Can it be I?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*It is one of you Twelve,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*the one who is dipping his bread beside me into the dish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}True, the Son of Man must go, as scripture says of him, yet alas for that man by whom the Son of Man is being betrayed! For that man it would be better never to have been born!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}While they were eating, Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, and said, \uc1\u8216*Take it; this is my body.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then he took a cup, and, after saying the thanksgiving, gave it to them, and they all drank from it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*This is my covenant-blood,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*which is poured out on behalf of many.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I tell you that I will never again drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I will drink it new in the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They then sang a hymn, and went out up the Mount of Olives,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}presently Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*All of you will fall away; for scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I will strike down the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Yet, after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Even if everyone else falls away,\uc1\u8217* said Peter, \uc1\u8216*I will not.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that you yourself today \uc1\u8211* yes, this very night \uc1\u8211* before the cock crows twice, will disown me three times.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But Peter vehemently protested, \uc1\u8216*Even if I must die with you, I will never disown you!\uc1\u8217* And they all said the same.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Presently they came to a garden known as Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples \uc1\u8216*Sit down here while I pray.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He took with him Peter, James, and John; and began to show signs of great dismay and deep distress of mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*I am sad at heart,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*sad even to death; wait here, and watch.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Going on a little further, he threw himself on the ground, and began to pray that, if it were possible, he might be spared that hour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Abba, Father,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*all things are possible to you; take away this cup from me; yet, not what I will, but what you will.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Then he came and found the three apostles asleep. \uc1\u8216*Simon,\uc1\u8217* he said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*are you asleep? Couldn\uc1\u8217*t you watch for one hour?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Watch and pray,\uc1\u8217* he said to them all, \uc1\u8216*so that you may not fall into temptation. True, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Again he went away, and prayed in the same words;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and coming back again he found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy; and they did not know what to say to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}A third time he came, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Sleep on now, and rest yourselves. Enough! My time has come. Look, the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of wicked people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Up, and let us be going. Look! My betrayer is close at hand.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And just then, while he was still speaking, Judas, who was one of the Twelve, came up; and with him a crowd of people, with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them. \uc1\u8216*The man whom I kiss,\uc1\u8217* he had said, \uc1\u8216*will be the one; arrest him and take him away safely.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}As soon as Judas came, he went up to Jesus at once, and said, \uc1\u8216*Rabbi!\uc1\u8217* and kissed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Then the men seized Jesus, and arrested him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}One of those who were standing by drew his sword, and struck at the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servant, and cut off his ear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}But Jesus spoke up, and said to the men, \uc1\u8216*Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}I have been among you day after day in the Temple Courts teaching, and yet you did not arrest me; but this is in fulfilment of the scriptures.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}And all the apostles deserted him and fled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}One young man did indeed follow him, wrapped only in a linen sheet. They tried to arrest him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}but he left the sheet in their hands, and fled naked.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Then they took Jesus to the high priest; and all the chief priests, elders, and the teachers of the Law assembled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Peter, who had followed Jesus at a distance into the courtyard of the high priest, was sitting there among the guards, warming himself at the blaze of the fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}Meanwhile the chief priest and the whole of the High Council were trying to get such evidence against Jesus as would warrant his being put to death, but they could not find any;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}for, though there were many who gave false evidence against him, yet their evidence did not agree.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}Presently some men stood up, and gave this false evidence against him \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}\uc1\u8216*We ourselves heard him say \uc1\u8220*I will destroy this Temple made with hands, and in three days build another made without hands.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}Yet not even on that point did their evidence agree.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}Then the high priest stood forward, and questioned Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Have you no answer to make?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*What is this evidence which these men are giving against you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}But Jesus remained silent, and made no answer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 A second time the high priest questioned him. \uc1\u8216*Are you,\uc1\u8217* he asked, \uc1\u8216*the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}\uc1\u8216*I am,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and you will all see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Almighty, and coming in the clouds of heaven.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}At this the high priest tore his vestments. \uc1\u8216*Why do we want any more witnesses?\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}\uc1\u8216*You heard his blasphemy? What is your verdict?\uc1\u8217* They all condemned him, declaring that he deserved death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}Some of those present began to spit at him, and to blindfold his eyes, and strike him, saying, as they did so, \uc1\u8216*Now play the prophet!\uc1\u8217* and even the guards received him with blows.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}While Peter was in the courtyard down below, one of the high priest\uc1\u8217*s maidservants came up;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}and, seeing Peter warming himself, she looked closely at him, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Why, you were with Jesus, the Nazarene!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}But Peter denied it. \uc1\u8216*I do not know or understand what you mean,\uc1\u8217* he replied. Then he went out into the porch;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}and there the maidservant, on seeing him, began to say again to the bystanders, \uc1\u8216*This is one of them!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}But Peter again denied it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Soon afterwards the bystanders again said to him, \uc1\u8216*You certainly are one of them; why you are a Galilean!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}But he said to them, \uc1\u8216*I swear that I do not know the man you are talking about! May God punish me if I am lying!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}At that moment, for the second time, a cock crowed; and Peter remembered the words that Jesus had said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Before a cock has crowed twice, you will disown me three times\uc1\u8221*; and, as he thought of it, he began to weep.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}As soon as it was daylight, the chief priests, after holding a consultation with elders and teachers of the Law \uc1\u8211* that is to say, the whole High Council \uc1\u8211* put Jesus in chains, and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Are you the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217* asked Pilate. \uc1\u8216*It is true,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the chief priests brought a number of charges against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Pilate questioned Jesus again. \uc1\u8216*Have you no reply to make?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*Listen, how many charges they are bringing against you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But Jesus still made no reply whatever; at which Pilate was astonished.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now, at the feast, Pilate used to grant the people the release of any one prisoner whom they might ask for.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A man called Barabbas was in prison, with the rioters who had committed murder during a riot.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So, when the crowd went up and began to ask Pilate to follow his usual custom,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}he answered, \uc1\u8216*Do you want me to release the \uc1\u8220*king of the Jews\uc1\u8221* for you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For he was aware that it was out of jealousy that the chief priests had given Jesus up to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the chief priests incited the crowd to get Barabbas released instead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Pilate, however, spoke to them again, \uc1\u8216*What should I do then with the man whom you call the \uc1\u8220*king of the Jews\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Again they shouted, \uc1\u8216*Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Why, what harm has he done?\uc1\u8217* Pilate kept saying to them. But they shouted furiously, \uc1\u8216*Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Barabbas to them, and, after scourging Jesus, gave him up to be crucified.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The soldiers then took Jesus away into the courtyard \uc1\u8211* that is the Government house \uc1\u8211* and they called the whole garrison together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}They dressed him in a purple robe, and, having twisted a crown of thorns, put it on him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and then began to salute him. \uc1\u8216*Long life to you, king of the Jews!\uc1\u8217* they said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And they kept striking him on the head with a rod, spitting at him, and bowing to the ground before him \uc1\u8211* going down on their knees;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and, when they had left off mocking him, they took off the purple robe, and put his own clothes on him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They led Jesus out to crucify him; and they compelled a passer-by, Simon from Cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to go with them to carry his cross.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}They brought Jesus to the place which was known as Golgotha \uc1\u8211* a name which means \uc1\u8220*place of a Skull.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}There they offered him drugged wine; but Jesus refused it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then they crucified him, and divided his clothes among them, casting lots for them, to settle what each should take.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It was nine in the morning when they crucified him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The words of the charge against him, written up over his head, read \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*THE KING OF THE JEWS.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And with him they crucified two robbers, one on the right, and the other on the left.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}  Some later manuscripts add: And the scripture was fulfilled that says, \uc1\u8220*He was counted among outlaws.\uc1\u8221* }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The passers-by railed at him, shaking their heads, as they said, \uc1\u8216*Ah! You who would destroy the Temple and build one in three days,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}come down from the cross and save yourself!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}In the same way the chief priests, with the teachers of the Law, said to one another in mockery,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*He saved others, but he cannot save himself! Let the Christ, the \uc1\u8220*king of Israel,\uc1\u8221* come down from the cross now so that we can see it and believe.\uc1\u8217* Even the men who had been crucified with Jesus insulted him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}At midday, a darkness came over the whole country, lasting until three in the afternoon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}And, at three, Jesus called out loudly, \uc1\u8216*Eloi, Eloi, lama sabacthani?\uc1\u8217* which means \uc1\u8220*My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Some of those standing round heard this, and said, \uc1\u8216*Listen! He is calling for Elijah!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And a man ran, and, soaking a sponge in common wine, put it on the end of a rod, and offered it to him to drink, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*Wait and let us see if Elijah is coming to take him down.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Jesus, giving a loud cry, breathed his last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The Temple curtain was torn in two from top to bottom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The Roman officer, who was standing facing Jesus, on seeing the way in which he breathed his last, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*This man must indeed have been God\uc1\u8217*s son!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}There were some women also watching from a distance, among them being Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James the Little and of Joseph, and Salome \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}all of whom used to accompany Jesus when he was in Galilee, and give him support \uc1\u8211* besides many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The evening had already fallen, when, as it was the Preparation day \uc1\u8211* the day before the Sabbath \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Joseph from Arimathea, a councillor of good position, who was himself living in expectation of the kingdom of God, came and ventured to go in to see Pilate, and to ask for the body of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}But Pilate was surprised to hear that he had already died. So he sent for the officer, and asked if he were already dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}and, on learning from the officer that it was so, he gave the corpse to Joseph.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Joseph, having bought a linen sheet, took Jesus down, and wound the sheet round him, and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of the rock; and then rolled a stone up against the entrance of the tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Mary of Magdala and Mary, the mother of Joseph, were watching to see where he was laid.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Risen Life Announced

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}When the Sabbath was over, Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought some spices, so that they might go and anoint the body of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Very early on the first day of the week they went to the tomb, after sunrise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They were saying to one another, \uc1\u8216*Who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance of the tomb?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But, on looking up, they saw that the stone had already been rolled back; it was a very large one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Going into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on their right, in a white robe, and they were dismayed; but he said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Do not be dismayed; you are looking for Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified; he has risen, he is not here! Look! Here is the place where they laid him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But go, and say to his disciples and to Peter \uc1\u8220*He is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They went out, and fled from the tomb, for they were trembling and bewildered; and they did not say a word to anyone, for they were frightened.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A late appendix

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs24 {\i (Inserted in some manuscripts from an ancient source)}

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After his rising again, early on the first day of the week, Jesus appeared first of all to Mary of Magdala, from whom he had driven out seven demons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}She went and told the news to those who had been with him and who were now in sorrow and tears;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}yet even they, when they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, did not believe it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Afterwards, altered in appearance, he made himself known to two of them, as they were walking, on their way into the country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They also went and told the rest, but they did not believe even them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Later on, he made himself known to the Eleven themselves as they were at a meal, and reproached them with their want of faith and their stubbornness, because they did not believe those who had seen him after he had risen from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then he said to them, \uc1\u8216*Go into all the world, and proclaim the good news to all creation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who refuses to believe will be condemned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Moreover these signs will attend those who believe. In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new languages;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}they will take up snakes in their hands; and, if they drink any poison, it will not hurt them; they will place their hands on sick people and they will recover.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But they set out, and made the proclamation everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the message by the signs which attended it.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Another appendix

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
But all that had been revealed to them they reported briefly to Peter and his companions. Afterwards Jesus himself sent them out, from east to west, the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Luke (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Good News According to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Luke

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Dedication

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To his Excellency, Theophilus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Many attempts have been already made to draw up an account of those events which have reached their conclusion among us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}just as they were reported to us by those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses, and afterwards became bearers of the message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, therefore, I also, since I have investigated all these events with great care from their very beginning, have resolved to write a connected history of them for you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}in order that you may be able to satisfy yourself of the accuracy of the story which you have heard from the lips of others.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Birth, Parentage, Infancy and Boyhood

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In the reign of Herod, king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah, who belonged to the division called after Abijah. His wife, whose name was Elizabeth, was also a descendant of Aaron.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They were both righteous people, who lived blameless lives, guiding their steps by all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But they had no child, Elizabeth being barren; and both of them were advanced in years.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}One day, when Zechariah was officiating as priest before God, during the turn of his division,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}it fell to him by lot, in accordance with the practice among the priests, to go into the Temple of the Lord and burn incense;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and, as it was the Hour of Incense, the people were all praying outside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right of the Altar of Incense.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Zechariah was startled at the sight and was awe-struck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But the angel said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid, Zechariah; your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, whom you will call by the name John.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He will be to you a joy and a delight; and many will rejoice over his birth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For he will be great in the sight of the Lord; he will not drink any wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit from the very hour of his birth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and will reconcile many of the Israelites to the Lord their God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He will go before him in the spirit and with the power of Elijah, to reconcile fathers to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous, and so make ready for the Lord a people prepared for him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*How can I be sure of this?\uc1\u8217* Zechariah asked the angel. \uc1\u8216*For I am an old man and my wife is advanced in years.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*I am Gabriel,\uc1\u8217* the angel answered, \uc1\u8216*who stand in the presence of God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And now you will be silent and unable to speak until the day when this takes place, because you did not believe what I said, though my words will be fulfilled in due course.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Meanwhile the people were watching for Zechariah, wondering at his remaining so long in the Temple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision there. But Zechariah kept making signs to them, and remained dumb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And, as soon as his term of service was finished, he returned home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}After this his wife, Elizabeth, became pregnant and lived in seclusion for five months.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*The Lord has done this for me,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*he has shown me kindness and taken away the public disgrace of childlessness under which I have been living.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Six months later the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town in Galilee called Nazareth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}to a maiden there who was engaged to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David. Her name was Mary.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Gabriel came into her presence and greeted her, saying, \uc1\u8216*You have been shown great favour \uc1\u8211* the Lord is with you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Mary was much disturbed at his words, and was wondering to herself what such a greeting could mean,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}when the angel spoke again, \uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favour with God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And now, you will conceive and give birth to a son, and you will give him the name Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The child will be great and will be called \uc1\u8220*Son of the Most High,\uc1\u8221* and the Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}and he will reign over the descendants of Jacob for ever; And to his kingdom there will be no end.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*How can this be?\uc1\u8217* Mary asked the angel. \uc1\u8216*For I have no husband.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*The Holy Spirit will descend on you,\uc1\u8217* answered the angel, \uc1\u8216*and the Power of the Most High will overshadow you; and therefore the child will be called \uc1\u8220*holy,\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*Son of God.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And Elizabeth, your cousin, is herself also expecting a son in her old age; and it is now the sixth month with her, though she is called barren;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}for no promise from God will fail to be fulfilled.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*I am the servant of the Lord,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Mary. \uc1\u8216*Let it be with me as you have said.\uc1\u8217* Then the angel left her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Soon after this Mary set out, and made her way quickly into the hill-country, to a town in Judah;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}and there she went into Zechariah\uc1\u8217*s house and greeted Elizabeth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}When Elizabeth heard Mary\uc1\u8217*s greeting, the child moved within her, and Elizabeth herself was filled with the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and cried aloud, \uc1\u8216*Blessed are you among women, and blessed is your unborn child!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}But how have I this honour, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}For, as soon as your greeting reached my ears, the child moved within me with delight!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Happy indeed is she who believed that the promise which she received from the Lord would be fulfilled.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}And Mary said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*My soul exalts the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}and my spirit delights in God my Saviour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}for he has looked with favour on his humble servant girl.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 From now on all generations will call me blessed!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*For the Almighty has done great things for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and holy is his name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}He has mercy on those who revere him
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in every generation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}\uc1\u8216*Mighty are the deeds of his arm!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 He has scattered the self-satisfied proud,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}he has cast down the mighty from their thrones,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he uplifts the humble,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}he has filled the hungry with good things,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the rich he has sent away empty.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}\uc1\u8216*He has stretched out his hand to his servant Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 ever mindful of his mercy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}as he promised to our ancestors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to Abraham and his descendants for ever.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three months, and then returned to her home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}When Elizabeth\uc1\u8217*s time came, she gave birth to a son;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}and her neighbours and relatives, hearing of the great goodness of the Lord to her, came to share her joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}A week later they met to circumcise the child, and were about to call him Zechariah after his father,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}when his mother spoke up, \uc1\u8216*No, he is to be called John.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}\uc1\u8216*You have no relation of that name!\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}and they made signs to the child\uc1\u8217*s father, to find out what he wished the child to be called.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}Asking for a writing tablet, he wrote the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*His name is John.\uc1\u8221* Everyone was surprised{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}and immediately Zechariah recovered his voice and the use of his tongue, and began to bless God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}All their neighbours were awe-struck at this, and throughout the hill-country of Judea the whole story was much talked about.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}All who heard it kept it in mind, asking one another \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*What can this child be destined to become?\uc1\u8217* For the Power of the Lord was with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}Then his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit, and, speaking under inspiration, said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}\uc1\u8216*Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 who has visited his people and wrought their deliverance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}and has raised up for us the strength of our salvation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in the house of his servant David \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}as he promised by the lips of his holy prophets of old \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}salvation from our enemies and from the hands of all who hate us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 72}showing mercy to our ancestors,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and mindful of his sacred covenant.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 73}This was the oath which he swore to our ancestor Abraham \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 74}that we should be rescued from the hands of our enemies,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 75}and should serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 in his presence all our days.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 76}And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you will go before the Lord to make ready his way,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 77}to give his people the knowledge of salvation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 through the forgiveness of their sins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 78}through the tender mercy of our God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 whereby the dawn will break on us from heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 79}to give light to those who live in darkness and the shadow of death,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and guide our feet into the way of peace.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 80}The child grew and became strong in spirit, and he lived in the wilds until the time came for his appearance before Israel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}About that time an edict was issued by the Emperor Augustus that a census should be taken of the whole Empire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}(This was the first census taken while Quirinius was Governor of Syria).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And everyone went to his own town to be registered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Among others Joseph went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Bethlehem, the town of David, in Judea \uc1\u8211* because he belonged to the family and house of David \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}to be registered with Mary, his engaged wife, who was about to become a mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}While they were there her time came,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and she gave birth to her first child, a son. And because there was no room for them in the inn, she swathed him round and laid him in a manger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In that same countryside were shepherds out in the open fields, watching their flocks that night,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}when an angel of the Lord suddenly stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them; and they were seized with fear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Have no fear,\uc1\u8217* the angel said. \uc1\u8216*For I bring you good news of a great joy in store for all the nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This day there has been born to you, in the town of David, a Saviour, who is Christ and Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And this will be the sign for you. You will find the infant swathed, and lying in a manger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then suddenly there appeared with the angel a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and singing \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*glory to God on high,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and on earth peace among those in whom he finds pleasure.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Now, when the angels had left them and gone back to heaven, the shepherds said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Let us go at once to Bethlehem, and see this thing that has happened, of which the Lord has told us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So they went quickly, and found Mary and Joseph, and the infant lying in a manger;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, when they saw it, they told of all that had been said to them about this child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}All who heard the shepherds were astonished at their story,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}while Mary treasured in her heart all that they said, and thought about it often.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And the shepherds went back, giving glory and praise to God for all that they had heard and seen. It had all happened as they had been told.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Eight days after the birth of the child, when it was time to circumcise him, he received the name Jesus \uc1\u8211* the name given him by the angel before his conception.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When the period of purification of mother and child, required by the Law of Moses, came to an end, his parents took the child up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}in compliance with the Law of the Lord that every firstborn male will be dedicated to the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and also to offer the sacrifice required by the Law of the Lord \uc1\u8211* a pair of turtle-doves or two young pigeons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}There was at that time in Jerusalem a man named Simeon, a righteous and devout man, who lived in constant expectation of  Israel\uc1\u8217*s consulation, and under the guidance of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not die until he had seen the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Moved by the Spirit, Simeon came into the Temple Courts, and, when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him what was customary under the Law,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Simeon himself took the child in his arms, and blessed God, and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Now, Lord, you will let your servant go,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 according to your word, in peace,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}for my eyes have seen the salvation
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}which you have prepared in the sight of all nations \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}a light to bring light to the Gentiles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and to be the glory of your people Israel.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}While the child\uc1\u8217*s father and mother were wondering at what was said about him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Simeon gave them his blessing, and said to Mary, the child\uc1\u8217*s mother, \uc1\u8216*This child is appointed to be the cause of the fall and rise of many in Israel, and to be a sign much spoken against \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Yes, the sword will pierce your own heart \uc1\u8211* and so the thoughts in many minds will be disclosed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}There was also a prophet named Hannah, a daughter of Phanuel and of the tribe of Asher. She was far advanced in years, having lived with her husband for seven years after marriage,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and then a widow, until she had reached the age of eighty-four. She never left the Temple Courts, but, fasting and praying, worshiped God night and day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}At that moment she came up, and began publicly to thank God and to speak about the child to all who were looking for the deliverance of Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}When the child\uc1\u8217*s parents had done everything required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own town of Nazareth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}The child grew and became strong and wise, and the blessing of God was on him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Every year the child\uc1\u8217*s parents used to go to Jerusalem at the Passover Festival.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}When Jesus was twelve years old, they went according to custom to Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}and had finished their visit; but, when they started to return, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, without their knowing it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Thinking that he was with their fellow travellers, they went one day\uc1\u8217*s journey before searching for him among their relatives and acquaintances;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}and then, as they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, searching everywhere for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}It was not until the third day that they found him in the Temple Courts, sitting among the teachers, now listening to them, now asking them questions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}All who listened to him marvelled at his intelligence and his answers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}His parents were amazed when they saw him, and his mother said to him, \uc1\u8216*My child, why have you treated us like this? Your father and I have been searching for you in great distress.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*What made you search for me?\uc1\u8217* he answered. \uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t you know that I must be in my Father\uc1\u8217*s house?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}His parents did not understand what he meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}However he went down with them to Nazareth, and submitted himself to their control; and his mother treasured all that was said in her heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}And Jesus grew in wisdom as he grew in years, and gained the blessing of God and people.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Preparation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}In the fifteenth year of the reign of the Emperor Tiberius, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod ruler of Galilee, his brother Philip ruler of the territory comprising Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias ruler of Abilene,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and when Annas and Caiaphas were high priests, a command from God came to John, the son of Zechariah, while he was in the wilderness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And John went through the whole district of the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of repentance, for the forgiveness of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}This was in fulfilment of what is said in the writings of the prophet Isaiah \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Make ready the way of the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 make his paths straight.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Every chasm will be filled,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 every mountain and hill will be levelled.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The winding ways will be straightened,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the rough roads made smooth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and everyone will see the salvation of God.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And John said to the crowds that went to be baptized by him, \uc1\u8216*You children of snakes! Who has prompted you to seek refuge from the coming judgment?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Let your lives, then, prove your repentance; and do not begin to say among yourselves \uc1\u8220*Abraham is our ancestor,\uc1\u8221* for I tell you that out of these stones God is able to raise descendants for Abraham!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Already, indeed, the axe is lying at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that fails to bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*What are we to do then?\uc1\u8217* the people asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*Let anyone who has two coats,\uc1\u8217* answered John, \uc1\u8216*share with the person who has none; and anyone who has food do the same.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Even tax collectors came to be baptized, and said to John, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, what are we to do?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Do not collect more than you have authority to demand,\uc1\u8217* John answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And when some soldiers on active service asked \uc1\u8216*And we \uc1\u8211* what are we to do?\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*Never use violence, or exact anything by false accusation; and be content with your pay.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then, while the people were in suspense, and were all debating with themselves whether John could be the Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}John, addressing them all, said, \uc1\u8216*I, indeed, baptize you with water; but there is coming one more powerful than I, and I am not fit even to unfasten his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}His winnowing-fan is in his hand so that he may clear his threshing-floor, and store the grain in his barn, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that cannot be put out.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And so with many different appeals John told his good news to the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But when John rebuked Herod the ruler, for Herodia his brother\uc1\u8217*s wife, and for all the evil things that he had done,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Herod crowned them all by shutting John up in prison.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Now after the baptism of all the people, and when Jesus had been baptized and was still praying, the heavens opened,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and the Holy Spirit came down on him in the form of a dove, and from the heavens came a voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You are my dearly loved son; you bring me great joy.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When beginning his work, Jesus was about thirty years old. He was regarded as the son of Joseph, whose ancestors were \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Eli,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Mattith, Levi, Melchiah, Janna, Joseph,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Mattithiah, Amos, Nahum, Azaliah, Nogah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Mattith, Mattithiah, Shimei, Joseph, Josheh,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Johanan, Rhesa, Zerubbabel, Salathiel, Neriah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Melchiah, Addi, Cosam, Elmodam, Er,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Joshua, Eliezer, Joram, Mattith, Levi,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Simeon, Judah, Joseph, Jonam, Eliakim,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Meleah, Menan, Mattithiah, Nathan, David,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Jesse, Obed, Boaz, Salah, Nahshon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Aminadab, Arni, Hezron, Perez, Judah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Jacob, Isaac, Abraham, Terah, Nahor,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Serug, Reu, Peleg, Eber, Shelah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Kenan, Arpachshad, Shem, Noah, Lamech,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Methuselah, Enoch, Jared, Mahalalel, Kenan,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Enosh, Seth, son of Adam, and Adam, son of God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}On returning from the Jordan, full of the Holy Spirit, Jesus was led by the power of the Spirit through the wilderness for forty days, tempted by the devil.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}All that time he ate nothing; and, when it was over, he became hungry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So the devil said to him, \uc1\u8216*If you are God\uc1\u8217*s Son, tell this stone to become a loaf of bread.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And Jesus answered him, \uc1\u8216*Scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*It is not on bread alone that a person is to live.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And the devil led Jesus up, and showing him in a single moment all the kingdoms of the earth, said to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*I will give you all this power, and the splendour of them; for it has been given into my hands and I give it to whom I wish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If you worship me, it will all be yours.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And Jesus answered him, \uc1\u8216*Scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You should worship the Lord your God, and worship him only.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The devil next led him into Jerusalem, and, placing him on the parapet of the Temple, said, \uc1\u8216*If you are God\uc1\u8217*s Son throw yourself down from here,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He will give his angels commands about you, to guard you safely,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And \uc1\u8220*On their hands they will lift you up, otherwise you might strike your foot against a stone.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But Jesus answered him, \uc1\u8216*It is said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must not tempt the Lord your God.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When he had tried every kind of temptation, the devil left Jesus, until another opportunity.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Work in Galilee

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Moved by the power of the Spirit, Jesus returned to Galilee. Reports about him spread through all that region;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and he began to teach in their synagogues, and was honoured by everyone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Coming to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, Jesus, as was his custom, went on the Sabbath into the synagogue, and stood up to read the scriptures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He was given the book of the prophet Isaiah; and Jesus opened the book and found the place where it says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*The Spirit of the Lord is on me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for he has consecrated me to bring good news to the poor,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he has sent me to proclaim release to captives and restoration of sight to the blind,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to set the oppressed at liberty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}to proclaim the year of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s favour.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then, closing the book and returning it to the attendant, he sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and Jesus began,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*This very day this passage has been fulfilled in your hearing.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}All who were present spoke well of him, and were astonished at the beautiful words that fell from his lips. \uc1\u8216*Isn\uc1\u8217*t Joseph\uc1\u8217*s son?\uc1\u8217* they asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Doubtless,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*you will remind me of the saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Doctor, cure yourself;\uc1\u8221* and you will say \uc1\u8220*Do here in your own country all that we have heard that has been done at Capernaum.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he continued, \uc1\u8216*that no prophet is acceptable in his own country.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}There were, doubtless, many widows in Israel in Elijah\uc1\u8217*s days, when the heavens were closed for three years and six months, and a severe famine prevailed throughout the country;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and yet it was not to one of them that Elijah was sent, but to a widow at Zarephath in Sidonia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, yet it was not one of them who was made clean, but Naaman the Syrian.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}All the people in the synagogue, as they listened to this, became enraged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Starting up, they drove Jesus out of the town, and led him to the brow of the hill on which their town stood, intending to hurl him down.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But he passed through the middle of the crowd and went on his way.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then Jesus went down to Capernaum, a city in Galilee. On the Sabbath he taught the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}They were amazed at his teaching, because his words were spoken with authority.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}In the synagogue there was a man with the spirit of a foul demon in him, who called out loudly,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Stop! What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are \uc1\u8211* the Holy One of God!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But Jesus rebuked the demon. \uc1\u8216*Be silent! Come out from him,\uc1\u8217* he said. The demon flung the man down in the middle of the people, and then came out from him, without causing him further harm.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And they were all lost in amazement, and kept saying to one another, \uc1\u8216*What words are these? For he gives his commands to the foul spirits with a marvellous authority, and they come out.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And rumours about Jesus traveled through every place in the region.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}On leaving the synagogue, Jesus went into Simon\uc1\u8217*s house. Now Simon\uc1\u8217*s mother-in-law was suffering from a severe attack of fever, and they asked Jesus to cure her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Bending over her, he rebuked the fever; the fever left her, and she immediately got up and began to take care of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}At sunset, all who had friends suffering from various diseases took them to Jesus; and he placed his hands on everyone of them and cured them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}And even demons came out from many people, screaming \uc1\u8220*You are the Son of God.\uc1\u8221* Jesus rebuked them, and would not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}At daybreak, Jesus went out and walked to a lonely spot. But crowds of people began to look for him; and they came to where he was and tried to detain him and prevent his leaving them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Jesus, however, said to them, \uc1\u8216*I must take the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns too, for that was why I was sent.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}And he continued to make his proclamation in the synagogues of Judea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Once, when the people were pressing round Jesus as they listened to God\uc1\u8217*s message, he happened to be standing by the shore of the Lake of Gennesaret, and saw two boats close to the shore.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The fishermen had gone away from them and were washing the nets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So, getting into one of the boats, which belonged to Simon, Jesus asked him to push off a little way from the shore, and then sat down and taught the people from the boat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, \uc1\u8216*Push off into deep water, and throw out your nets for a haul.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*We have been hard at work all night, Sir,\uc1\u8217* answered Simon, \uc1\u8216*and have not caught anything, but, at your bidding, I will throw out the nets.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They did so, and enclosed such a great shoal of fish that their nets began to break.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So they signalled to their partners in the other boat to come and help them; and they came and filled both the boats so full of fish that they were almost sinking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Simon Peter saw this, he threw himself down at Jesus\uc1\u8217* knees, exclaiming, \uc1\u8216*Master, leave me, for I am a sinful man!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For he and all who were with him were lost in amazement at the haul of fish which they had made;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and so, too, were James and John, Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s sons, who were Simon\uc1\u8217*s partners. \uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to Simon, \uc1\u8216*from today you will catch people.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And, when they had brought their boats to shore, they left everything, and followed him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On one occasion Jesus was staying in a town, when he saw a man who was covered with leprosy. When the leper saw Jesus, he threw himself on his face and implored his help, \uc1\u8216*Master, if only you are willing, you are able to make me clean.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Stretching out his hand, Jesus touched him, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*I am willing; become clean.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Instantly the leprosy left the man;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and then Jesus impressed on him that he was not to say a word to anyone, \uc1\u8216*but,\uc1\u8217* he added, \uc1\u8216*set out and show yourself to the priest, and make the offerings for your cleansing, in the manner directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}However, the story about Jesus spread all the more, and great crowds came together to listen to him, and to be cured of their illnesses;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}but Jesus used to withdraw to lonely places and pray.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}On one of those days, when Jesus was teaching, some Pharisees and Doctors of the Law were sitting near by. (They had come from all the villages in Galilee and Judea, and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord was on Jesus, so that he could work cures.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And there some men brought on a bed a man who was paralysed. They tried to get him in and lay him before Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}but, finding no way of getting him in owing to the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him through the tiles, with his pallet, into the middle of the people and in front of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When he saw their faith, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Friend, your sins have been forgiven you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees began debating about this. \uc1\u8216*Who is this man who speaks so blasphemously?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*Who can forgive sins except God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When Jesus became aware of the way in which they were debating, he turned to them and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*What are you debating with yourselves?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Which is the easier? \uc1\u8211* to say \uc1\u8220*Your sins have been forgiven you\uc1\u8221*? Or to say \uc1\u8220*Get up, and walk\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But so that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211* he spoke to the paralysed man \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*To you I say, Get up, and take up your pallet, and go to your home.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Instantly the man stood up before their eyes, took up what he had been lying on, and went to his home, praising God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The people, one and all, were lost in amazement, and praised God; and in great awe they said, \uc1\u8216*We have seen marvellous things today!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}After this, Jesus went out; and he noticed a tax-gatherer, named Levi, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Levi left everything and got up and followed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And Levi gave a great banquet at his house, in honour of Jesus; and a large number of tax collectors and others were having dinner with them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The Pharisees and the teachers of the Law belonging to their party complained of this to the disciples of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}In answer Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*It is not those who are well who need a doctor, but those who are ill.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}I have not come to call the religious, but the outcast, to repent.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*John\uc1\u8217*s disciples,\uc1\u8217* they said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Often fast and say prayers, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, while yours are eating and drinking!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But Jesus answered them, \uc1\u8216*Can you make the groom\uc1\u8217*s friends fast while the groom is with them?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But the days will come \uc1\u8211* a time when the groom will be taken away from them; and they will fast then, when those days come.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Then, as an illustration, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*No one ever tears a piece from a new garment and puts it on an old one; for, if they do, they will not only tear the new garment, but the piece from the new one will not match the old.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And no one puts new wine into old wine-skins; for, if they do, the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine itself will run out, and the skins be lost.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But new wine must be put into fresh skins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}No one after drinking old wine wishes for new. \uc1\u8220*No,\uc1\u8221* they say, \uc1\u8220*the old is excellent.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}One Sabbath Jesus was walking through cornfields, and his disciples were picking the ears of wheat, and rubbing them in their hands, and eating them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Why are you doing what it is not allowable to do on the Sabbath?\uc1\u8217* asked some of the Pharisees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Jesus\uc1\u8217* answer was, \uc1\u8216*Haven\uc1\u8217*t you read even of what David did, when he was hungry, he and his companions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}That he went into the house of God, and took the consecrated bread and ate it, and gave some to his companions, though only the priests are allowed to eat it?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*The Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}On another Sabbath Jesus went into the synagogue and taught; and there was a man there whose right hand was withered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely, to see if he would work cures on the Sabbath, so that they might find a charge to bring against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Jesus, however, knew what was in the their minds, and said to the man whose hand was withered, \uc1\u8216*Stand up and come out into the middle.\uc1\u8217* The man stood up;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*I ask you, is it allowable to do good on the Sabbath \uc1\u8211* or harm? To save a life, or let it perish?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then, looking round at them all, he said to the man, \uc1\u8216*Stretch out your hand.\uc1\u8217* The man did so; and his hand had become sound.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees were mad with rage, and consulted together what they could do to Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Now about that time, Jesus went out, up the hill, to pray, and spent the whole night in prayer to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When day came, he summoned his disciples, and chose twelve of them, whom he also named \uc1\u8220*apostles.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They were Simon (whom Jesus also named Peter), and his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Simon known as the Zealot,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who proved a traitor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Afterwards Jesus came down the hill with them and took his stand on a level place. With him were a large crowd of his disciples, and great numbers of people from the whole of Judea, Jerusalem, and the coast district of Tyre and Sidon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}who had come to hear him and to be restored to health. Those, too, who were troubled with foul spirits were cured;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and everyone in the crowd was trying to touch him, because a power went out from him which restored them all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then, raising his eyes and looking at his disciples, Jesus said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Blessed are you when people hate you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and when they expel you from among them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and insult you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and reject your name as an evil thing \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 because of the Son of Man.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then indeed you may be glad and dance for joy, for be sure that your reward in heaven will be great; for that is what their ancestors did to the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 alas for you who are rich,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you have had your comforts in full.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Alas for you who are sated now,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you will hunger.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Alas for you who laugh now,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for you will mourn and weep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Alas for you when everyone speaks well of you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for this is what their ancestors did to the false prophets.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But to you who hear I say \uc1\u8211* love your enemies, show kindness to those who hate you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}bless those who curse you, pray for those who insult you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}When someone gives one of you a blow on the cheek, offer the other cheek as well; and, when anyone takes away your cloak, do not keep back your coat either.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Give to everyone who asks of you; and, when anyone takes away what is yours, do not demand its return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Do to others as you wish them to do to you.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}If you love only those who love you, what thanks will be due to you? Why, even the outcast love those who love them!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}For, if you show kindness only to those who show kindness to you, what thanks will be due to you? Even the outcast do that!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}If you lend only to those from whom you expect to get something, what thanks will be due to you? Even the outcast lend to the outcast in the hope of getting as much in return!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}But love your enemies, and show them kindness, and lend to them, never despairing. Then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to the thankless and the bad.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Learn to be merciful \uc1\u8211* even as your Father is merciful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Do not judge, and you will not be judged; do not condemn, and you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Give, and others will give to you. A generous measure, pressed and shaken down, and running over, will they pour into your lap; for the standard you use will be the standard used for you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Then, speaking in parables, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Can one blind person guide another? Will they not both fall into a ditch?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}A student is not above their teacher; yet every finished student will be like their teacher.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}And why do you look at the speck of sawdust in someone\uc1\u8217*s eye, while you pay no attention at all to the plank of wood in your own?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}How can you say to your friend \uc1\u8220*Friend, let me take out the speck in your eye,\uc1\u8221* while you yourself do not see the plank in your own? Hypocrite! Take out the plank from your own eye first, and then you will see clearly how to take out the speck in your friend\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}There is no such thing as a good tree bearing worthless fruit, or, on the other hand, a worthless tree bearing good fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}For every tree is known by its own fruit. People do not gather figs off thorn bushes, nor pick a bunch of grapes off a bramble.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}A good person, from the good stores of their heart, brings out what is good; while a bad person, from their bad stores, brings out what is bad. For what fills someone\uc1\u8217*s heart will rise to their lips.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Why do you call me \uc1\u8220*Master! Master!\uc1\u8221* and yet fail to do what I tell you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Everyone who comes to me and listens to my teaching and acts on it \uc1\u8211* I will show you to whom they may be compared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}They may be compared to a person building a house, who dug, and went deep, and laid the foundation on the rock. Then, when a flood came, the river swept down on that house, but had no power to shake it, because it had been built well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}But those who have listened and not acted on what they have heard may be compared to a person who built a house on the ground without any foundation. The river swept down on it, and the house immediately collapsed; and great was the crash that followed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}When Jesus had brought to a conclusion all that he had then had to say to the people, he entered Capernaum.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}A centurion in the Roman army had a slave whom he valued, and who was seriously ill \uc1\u8211* almost at the point of death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, hearing about Jesus, he sent some Jewish elders to him, with the request that he would come and save his slave\uc1\u8217*s life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When they found Jesus, they earnestly implored him to do so. \uc1\u8216*He deserves the favour from you,\uc1\u8217* they said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*For he is devoted to our nation, and himself built our synagogue for us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Jesus went with them. But, when he was no great distance from the house, the centurion sent some friends with the message \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Do not trouble yourself, Sir; for I am unworthy to receive you under my roof.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}That was why I did not even venture to come to you myself; but speak, and let my manservant be cured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For I myself am a man under the orders of others, with soldiers under me; and if I say to one of them \uc1\u8220*Go,\uc1\u8221* he goes, and to another \uc1\u8220*Come,\uc1\u8221* he comes, and to my slave \uc1\u8220*Do this,\uc1\u8221* he does it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Jesus was surprised to hear these words from him; and, turning to the crowd which was following him, he said, \uc1\u8216*I tell you, nowhere in Israel have I met with such faith as this!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And, when the messengers returned to the house, they found the slave recovered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Shortly after, Jesus went to a town called Nain, his disciples and a great crowd going with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Just as he approached the gate of the town, there was a dead man being carried out for burial \uc1\u8211* an only son, and his mother was a widow. A large number of the people of the town were with her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When he saw her, the Master was moved with compassion for her, and he said to her, \uc1\u8216*Do not weep.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he went up and touched the bier, and the bearers stopped; and Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Young man, I am speaking to you \uc1\u8211* Rise!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The dead man sat up and began to talk, and Jesus restored him to his mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Everyone was awe-struck and began praising God. \uc1\u8216*A great prophet has arisen among us,\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*God has visited his people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And this story about Jesus spread all through Judea, and in the neighbouring countries as well.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}All these events were reported to John by his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So he summoned two of them, and sent them to the Master to ask \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Are you \uc1\u8220*the coming one,\uc1\u8221* or are we to look for someone else?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When these men found Jesus, they said, \uc1\u8216*John the Baptist has sent us to you to ask \uc1\u8211* Are you \uc1\u8220*the coming one,\uc1\u8221* or are we to look for somebody else?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}At that very time Jesus had cured many people of diseases, afflictions, and wicked spirits, and had given many blind people their sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So his answer to the question was, \uc1\u8216*Go and report to John what you have witnessed and heard \uc1\u8211* the blind recover their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are made clean, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised to life, the good news is told to the poor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And blessed is the person who finds no hindrance in me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When John\uc1\u8217*s messengers had left, Jesus, speaking to the crowds, began to say with reference to John,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*What did you go out into the wilderness to look at? A reed waving in the wind? If not, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in rich clothing? Why, those who are accustomed to fine clothes and luxury live in royal palaces.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}What then did you go to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}This is the man of whom scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I am sending my messenger ahead of you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he will prepare your way before you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}There is, I tell you, no one born of a woman who is greater than John; and yet the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}(All the people, when they heard this, and even the tax collectors, having accepted John\uc1\u8217*s baptism, acknowledged the justice of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But the Pharisees and the students of the Law, having rejected John\uc1\u8217*s baptism, frustrated God\uc1\u8217*s purpose in regard to them.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*To what then,\uc1\u8217* Jesus continued, \uc1\u8216*should I compare the people of the present generation? What are they like?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}They are like some little children who are sitting in the marketplace and calling out to one another \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*We have played the flute for you, but you have not danced; We have wailed, but you have not wept!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}For now that John the Baptist has come, not eating bread or drinking wine, you are saying \uc1\u8220*He has a demon in him\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}and now that the Son of Man has come, eating and drinking, you are saying \uc1\u8220*Here is a glutton and a wine-drinker, a friend of tax collectors and outcasts.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And yet wisdom is vindicated by all her children.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}One of the Pharisees asked Jesus to dine with him, so Jesus went to his house and took his place at the table.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Just then a woman, who was an outcast in the town, having heard that Jesus was eating in the Pharisee\uc1\u8217*s house, brought an alabaster jar of perfume,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}and placed herself behind Jesus, near his feet, weeping. Then she began to make his feet wet with her tears, and she dried them with the hair of her head, repeatedly kissing his feet and anointing them with the perfume.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}When the Pharisee who had invited Jesus saw this, he said to himself, \uc1\u8216*Had this man been \uc1\u8220*the prophet,\uc1\u8221* he would have known who, and what sort of woman, this is who is touching him, and that she is an outcast.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But, addressing him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Simon, I have something to say to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Pray do so, teacher,\uc1\u8217* Simon answered; and Jesus began,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*There were two people who were in debt to a moneylender; one owed five hundred silver coins, and the other fifty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}As they were unable to pay, he forgave them both. Which of them, do you think, will love him the more?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}\uc1\u8216*I suppose,\uc1\u8217* answered Simon, \uc1\u8216*it will be the man to whom he forgave the greater debt.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*You are right,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and then, turning to the woman, he said to Simon, \uc1\u8216*Do you see this woman? I came into your house \uc1\u8211* you gave me no water for my feet, but she has made my feet wet with her tears and dried them with her hair.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}You did not give me one kiss, but she, from the moment I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}You did not anoint even my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with perfume.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}So I tell you, her great love shows that her sins, many as they are, have been pardoned. One who is pardoned little loves little.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Then he said to the woman, \uc1\u8216*Your sins have been pardoned.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}The other guests began to say to one another, \uc1\u8216*Who is this man who even pardons sins?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But Jesus said to the woman, \uc1\u8216*Your faith has delivered you; go, and peace be with you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Shortly afterwards, Jesus went on a journey through the towns and villages, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. With him went the Twelve,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}as well as some women who had been cured of wicked spirits and of infirmities. They were Mary, known as Mary of Magdala (from whom seven demons had been expelled),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and Joanna (the wife of Herod\uc1\u8217*s steward, Chuza), and Susannah, and many others \uc1\u8211* all of whom provided for Jesus and his apostles out of their own resources.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Once, when a great crowd was collecting, and, when the people of town after town were flocking to Jesus, he spoke to them in the form of a parable,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*The sower went out to sow his seed; and, as he was sowing, some of the seed fell along the path and was trodden on; and the wild birds ate it up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Other seed fell on rock, and, as soon as it began to grow, because it had no moisture, it withered away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Other seed fell in the middle of brambles, but the brambles grew up with it and choked it entirely.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Other seed fell into rich soil, and grew, and gave a hundredfold return.\uc1\u8217* After saying this, Jesus cried aloud, \uc1\u8216*Let those who have ears to hear with hear.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}His disciples asked Jesus the meaning of this parable.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*To you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*the knowledge of the hidden truths of the kingdom of God has been imparted, but to others in parables only, so that though they have eyes they may not see, and though they have ears, they may not understand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This is the parable \uc1\u8211* The seed is God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}By the seed which fell along the path are meant those who hear the message; but then comes the devil and carries away the message from their minds, to prevent their believing it and being saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}By the seed which fell on the rock are meant those who, as soon as they hear the message, welcome it joyfully; but they have no root, and believe it only for a time, and, when the time of temptation comes, they draw back.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}By that which fell among the brambles are meant those who hear the message, but who, as they go on their way, are completely choked by this world\uc1\u8217*s cares and wealth and pleasures, and bring nothing to perfection.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But by that in the good ground are meant those who, having heard the message, keep it in the good, rich soil of their hearts, and patiently yield a return.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*No one sets light to a lamp and then covers it with a bowl or puts it underneath a couch, but they put it on a lamp-stand, so that anyone who comes in may see the light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Nothing is hidden which will not be brought into the light of day, not ever kept hidden which will not some day become known and come into the light of day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Take care, then, how you listen. For, to all those who have, more will be given; while, from all those who have nothing, even what they seem to have will be taken away.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Presently Jesus\uc1\u8217* mother and brothers came where he was, but they were not able to join him because of the crowd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So word was brought to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}His reply, spoken to them all, was, \uc1\u8216*My mother and my brothers are those who listen to God\uc1\u8217*s teaching and do what it says.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}One day about that time, Jesus got into a boat with his disciples and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Let us go across the lake.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So they put off. While they were sailing, Jesus fell asleep. A squall swept down on the lake, and their boat was filling and they were in danger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So the disciples came and roused him. \uc1\u8216*Sir, Sir,\uc1\u8217* they cried, \uc1\u8216*we are lost!\uc1\u8217* Jesus rose and rebuked the wind and the rushing waves, and they fell, and a calm followed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*Where is your faith?\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed. But in great awe and amazement they said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Who can this be, who commands even the winds and the waves, and they obey him?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They reached the region of the Gerasenes, which is on the opposite side to Galilee,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and, on getting ashore, Jesus met a man, who had demons in him, coming out of the town. For a long time this man had worn no clothing, and he had not lived in a house, but in the tombs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Catching sight of Jesus, he shrieked out and threw himself down before him, and in a loud voice exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you not to torment me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For Jesus was commanding the foul spirit to come out of the man. On many occasions it had seized him, and, even when secured with chains and fetters, and watched, he would break through anything that bound him, and be driven by the demon into the wilds.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*What is your name?\uc1\u8217* Jesus asked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Legion,\uc1\u8217* he answered (for many demons had taken possession of him);{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and the demons begged Jesus not to order them away into the bottomless pit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}There was a herd of many pigs close by feeding on the hill-side; and the demons begged Jesus to give them leave to enter into them. Jesus gave them leave.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They came out from the man and took possession of the pigs; and the herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake and were drowned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}When the men who tended them saw what had happened, they ran away, and carried the news to the town, and to the country round.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The people went out to see what had happened, and, when they came to Jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting, clothed and in his right mind, at Jesus\uc1\u8217* feet; and they were awe-struck.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Those who had seen it told them how the possessed man had been delivered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Then all the people in the region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to leave them, for they were terrified. Jesus got into a boat and returned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The man from whom the demons had gone out begged Jesus to let him be with him; but Jesus sent him away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Go back to your home,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and relate the story of all that God has done for you.\uc1\u8217* So the man went through the whole town and proclaimed, as he went, all that Jesus had done for him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}On his return, Jesus was welcomed by the people; for everyone was looking out for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}And a man named Jairus, who was a synagogue leader, came to Jesus, and threw himself at Jesus\uc1\u8217* feet, with entreaties that he would come to his house,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}because his only daughter, who was about twelve years old, was dying. As Jesus was going, the people were pressing closely round him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And a woman, who had suffered from haemorrhage for twelve years, and whom no one could cure,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}came up behind and touched the tassel of his cloak. Instantly the haemorrhage ceased.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}\uc1\u8216*Who touched me?\uc1\u8217* Jesus asked; and, while everyone was denying having done so, Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Why, Sir, the people are crowding round you and pressing against you!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*Somebody touched me,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*for I felt that power had gone out from me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Then the woman, when she saw that she was discovered, came forward trembling, and threw herself down before him; and, in the presence of all the people, she told him her reason for touching him, and that she had been cured instantly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*Daughter,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*your faith has delivered you. Go, and peace be with you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Before he had finished speaking, someone came from the house of the synagogue leader and said, \uc1\u8216*Your daughter is dead! Do not trouble the teacher further.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But Jesus, hearing this, spoke to the leader, \uc1\u8216*Do not be afraid; only have faith, and she will yet be delivered.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}When he reached the house, he did not allow anyone to go in with him, except Peter, John, and James, and the child\uc1\u8217*s father and mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}And everyone was weeping and mourning for her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Do not weep,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*she is not dead; she is asleep.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}They began to laugh at him, for they knew that she was dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}But, taking her by the hand, Jesus said in a loud voice, \uc1\u8216*Child, rise!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}The child\uc1\u8217*s spirit returned to her, and she instantly stood up; and Jesus ordered them to give her something to eat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Her parents were amazed, but Jesus impressed on them that they were not to tell anyone what had happened.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Jesus called the Twelve together, and gave them power and authority over all demons, as well as to cure diseases.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He sent them out as his messengers, to proclaim the kingdom of God, and to work cures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Do not,\uc1\u8217* he said to them, \uc1\u8216*take anything for your journey; not even a staff, or a bag, or bread, or any silver, or a change of clothes with you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Whatever house you go to stay in, remain there, and leave from that place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If people do not welcome you, as you leave that town, shake even the dust off your feet, as a protest against them.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then they set out and went from village to village, telling the good news and curing people everywhere.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Herod the ruler heard of all that was happening, and was perplexed, because it was said by some that John must be risen from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Some again said that Elijah had appeared, and others that one of the old prophets had risen again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But Herod himself said, \uc1\u8216*John I beheaded; but who is this of whom I hear such things?\uc1\u8217* And he endeavoured to see him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}When the apostles returned, they related to Jesus all that they had done. Then Jesus went privately to a town called Bethsaida, taking the apostles with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But the people recognised him and followed him in crowds; and Jesus welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, while he cured those who were in need of help.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The day was drawing to a close, when the twelve came up to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Send the crowd away, so that they may make their way to the villages and farms round about, and find themselves lodgings and provisions, for we are in a lonely spot here.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*It is for you to give them something to eat.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We have not more than five loaves and two fish,\uc1\u8217* they answered. \uc1\u8216*Unless indeed we are to go and buy food for all these people.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}(For the men among them were about five thousand.) \uc1\u8216*Get them seated in companies,\uc1\u8217* was his reply, \uc1\u8216*about fifty in each.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This they did, and got all the people seated.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Taking the five loaves and the two fish, Jesus looked up to heaven and said the blessing over them. Then he broke them in pieces, and gave them to his disciples to set before the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Everyone had sufficient to eat, and what was left of the broken pieces was picked up \uc1\u8211* twelve baskets.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Afterwards, when Jesus was alone, praying, his disciples joined him, and he asked them this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who do the people say that I am?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*John the Baptist,\uc1\u8217* was their answer. \uc1\u8216*Others, however, say that you are Elijah, while others say that one of the old prophets has risen again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*But you,\uc1\u8217* he went on, \uc1\u8216*who do you say that I am?\uc1\u8217* And to this Peter answered, \uc1\u8216*The Christ of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus, however, strictly charged them not to say this to anyone;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}he told them that the Son of Man must undergo much suffering, and be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise on the third day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And to all present he said, \uc1\u8216*If any one wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, and take up their cross daily, and follow me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For whoever wishes to save their life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake, loses his life \uc1\u8211* that person will save it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}What good does it do someone if, when they has gained the whole world, they has lost or forfeited themselves?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Whoever is ashamed of me and of my teaching, the Son of Man will be ashamed of them, when he comes in his glory and the glory of the father and of the holy angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Indeed, I tell you, some who are standing before me will not know death, until they have seen the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}About eight days after speaking these words, Jesus went up the mountain to pray, taking with him Peter, John, and James.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As he was praying, the aspect of his face was changed, and his clothing became a dazzling white.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And all at once two men were talking with Jesus; they were Moses and Elijah,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}who appeared in a glorified state, and spoke of his departure, which was destined to take place at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Peter and his companions had been overpowered by sleep but, suddenly becoming wide awake, they saw Jesus glorified and the two men who were standing beside him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And, as Moses and Elijah were passing away from Jesus, Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Sir, it is good to be here; let us make three tents, one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.\uc1\u8217* He did not know what he was saying;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}and, while he was speaking, a cloud came down and enveloped them; and they were afraid, as they passed into the cloud;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and from the cloud came a voice which said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*This is my Son, the Chosen One; him you must hear.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}And, as the voice ceased, Jesus was found alone. The apostles kept silence, and told no one about any of the things that they had seen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a great crowd met Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And just then a man in the crowd shouted out, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, I entreat you to look at my son, for he is my only child;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}all at once a spirit will seize him, suddenly shriek out, and throw him into convulsions until he foams, and will leave him only when he is utterly exhausted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}I entreated your disciples to drive the spirit out, but they could not.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*Faithless and perverse generation!\uc1\u8217* Jesus exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*How long must I be with you and have patience with you? Lead your son here.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}While the boy was coming up to Jesus, the demon dashed him down and threw him into convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the foul spirit, and cured the boy, and gave him back to his father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And all present were struck with awe at the majesty of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
In the midst of the general astonishment at all that Jesus was doing, he said to his disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8216*Listen carefully to my words. For the Son of Man is destined to be betrayed into the hands of his fellow men.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}But the disciples did not understand the meaning of this; it had been concealed from them so that they did not see it, and they were afraid to question him as to what he meant.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}A discussion arose among the disciples as to which of them was the greatest;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}and Jesus, knowing of the discussion that was occupying their thoughts, took hold of a little child, and placed it beside him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}and then said to them, \uc1\u8216*Anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even this little child is welcoming me; and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming him who sent me as his messenger. For whoever is least among you all \uc1\u8211* that person is great.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}John said, \uc1\u8216*Sir, we saw a man driving out demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he does not follow you with us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}\uc1\u8216*None of you must prevent him,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to John, \uc1\u8216*whoever is not against you is for you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Journey to Jerusalem

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}As the days before his being taken up to heaven were growing few, Jesus set his face resolutely in the direction of Jerusalem; and he sent on messengers in advance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}On their way, they went into a Samaritan village to make preparations for him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}but the people there did not welcome him, because his face was set in the direction of Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}When James and John saw this, they said, \uc1\u8216*Master, do you wish us to call for fire to come down from the heavens and consume them?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}But Jesus turned and rebuked them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}And they made their way to another village.
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}And, while they were on their way, a man said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*I will follow you wherever you go.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}\uc1\u8216*Foxes have holes,\uc1\u8217* he replied, \uc1\u8216*and wild birds their nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}To another man Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Let me first go and bury my father,\uc1\u8217* said the man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}But Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Leave the dead to bury their dead; but go yourself and carry far and wide the news of the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* said another, \uc1\u8216*I will follow you; but first let me say goodbye to my family.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*No one who looks back, after putting their hand to the plough, is fitted for the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}After this, the Master appointed seventy-two other disciples, and sent them on as his messengers, two and two, in advance, to every town and place that he was himself intending to visit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*The harvest,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*is abundant, but the labourers are few. Therefore pray to the owner of the harvest to send labourers to gather in his harvest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now, go. Remember, I am sending you out as my messengers like lambs among wolves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Do not take a purse with you, or a bag, or sandals; and do not stop to greet anyone on your journey.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Whatever house you go to stay at, begin by praying for a blessing on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then, if anyone there is deserving of a blessing, your blessing will rest on him; but if not, it will come back on yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Remain at that same house, and eat and drink whatever they offer you; for the worker is worth their wages. Do not keep changing from one house to another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Whatever town you visit, if the people welcome you, eat what is set before you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}cure the sick there, and tell people that the kingdom of God is close at hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But, whatever town you go to visit, if the people do not welcome you, go out into its streets and say{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*We wipe off the dust of your town which has clung to Our feet; still, be assured that the kingdom of God is close at Hand.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I tell you that the doom of Sodom will be more bearable on that day than the doom of that town.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Alas for you, Chorazin! Alas for you, Bethsaida! For, if the miracles which have been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have sat in sackcloth and ashes and repented long ago.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet the doom of Tyre and Sidon will be more bearable at the judgment than yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And you, Capernaum! Will you exalt yourself to heaven? You will be flung down to Hades.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Anyone who listens to you is listening to me, and anyone who rejects you is rejecting me; while the person who rejects me is rejecting him who sent me as his messenger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When the seventy-two returned, they exclaimed joyfully, \uc1\u8216*Master, even the demons submit to us when we use your name.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*I have had visions of Satan, fallen, like lightning from the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Remember, I have given you the power to trample on snakes and scorpions, and to meet all the strength of the Enemy. Nothing will ever harm you in any way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Yet do not rejoice in the fact that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names have been enrolled in heaven.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}At that same time, moved to exultation by the Holy Spirit, Jesus said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that, though you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, you have revealed them to the childlike! Yes, Father, I thank you that this has seemed good to you.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Everything has been committed to me by my Father; nor does anyone know who the Son is, except the Father, or who the Father is, except the Son and those to whom the Son may choose to reveal him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then, turning to his disciples, Jesus said to them alone, \uc1\u8216*Blessed are the eyes that see what you are seeing;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}for, I tell you, many prophets and kings wished for the sight of the things which you are seeing, yet never heard them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Just then a student of the Law came forward to test Jesus further. \uc1\u8216*Teacher,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*what must I do if I am to gain eternal life?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*What is said in the Law?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*What do you read there?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}His reply was \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*You must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbour as you love yourself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*You have answered right,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Do that, and you will live.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}But the man, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*And who is my neighbour?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}To which Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*A man was once going down from Jerusalem to Jericho when he fell into the hands of robbers, who stripped him of everything, and beat him, and went away leaving him half dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}As it chanced, a priest was going down by that road. He saw the man, but passed by on the opposite side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}A Levite, too, did the same; he came up to the spot, but, when he saw the man, passed by on the opposite side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But a Samaritan, traveling that way, came upon the man, and, when he saw him, he was moved with compassion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}He went to him and bound up his wounds, dressing them with oil and wine, and then put him on his own mule, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The next day he took out two silver coins and gave them to the innkeeper. \uc1\u8220*Take care of him,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and whatever more you may spend I will myself repay you on my way back.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Now which, do you think, of these three men,\uc1\u8217* asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*proved himself a neighbour to the man who fell into the robbers\uc1\u8217* hands?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*The one that took pity on him,\uc1\u8217* was the answer; at which Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Go and do the same yourself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}As they continued their journey, Jesus came to a village, where a woman named Martha welcomed him to her house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}She had a sister called Mary, who seated herself at the Master\uc1\u8217*s feet, and listened to his teaching;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}but Martha was distracted by the many preparations that she was making. So she went up to Jesus and said, \uc1\u8216*Master, do you approve of my sister\uc1\u8217*s leaving me to make preparations alone? Tell her to help me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*Martha, Martha,\uc1\u8217* replied the Master, \uc1\u8216*you are anxious and trouble yourself about many things;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}but only a few are necessary, or rather one. Mary has chosen the good part, and it will not be taken away from her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}One day Jesus was at a certain place praying, and, when he had finished, one of his disciples said to him, \uc1\u8216*Master, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*When you pray,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*say \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Father,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 may your name be held holy,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 your kingdom come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Give us each day the bread that we will need;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and forgive us our sins,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for we ourselves forgive everyone who wrongs us;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and take us not into temptation.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Jesus also said to them, \uc1\u8216*Suppose that one of you who has a friend were to go to him in the middle of the night and say \uc1\u8220*Friend, lend me three loaves,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for a friend of mine has arrived at my house after a journey, and I have nothing to offer him;\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And suppose that the other should answer from inside \uc1\u8220*Do not trouble me; the door is already fastened, and my children and I are in bed; I cannot get up and give you anything\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I tell you that, even though he will not get up and give him anything because he is a friend, yet because of his persistence he will rouse himself and give him what he wants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*And so I say to you \uc1\u8211* Ask, and your prayer will be granted, search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the person who asks receives, everyone who searches finds, and to the person who knocks the door will be opened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}What father among you, if his son asks him for a fish, will give him a snake instead,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}or, if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If you, then, naturally wicked though you are, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Once Jesus was driving out a mute demon, and, when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke. The people were amazed at this;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but some of them said, \uc1\u8216*He drives out demons by the help of Beelzebul, the chief of the demons\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}while others, to test him, asked him for some sign from the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Jesus himself, however, was aware of what they were thinking, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Any kingdom wholly divided against itself becomes a desolation; and a divided house falls.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So, too, if Satan is wholly divided against himself, how can his kingdom last? Yet you say that I drive out demons by the help of Beelzebul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But, if it is by Beelzebul\uc1\u8217*s help that I drive out demons, by whose help is it that your own sons drive them out? Therefore they will themselves be your judges.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But, if it is by the hand of God that I drive out demons, then the kingdom of God must already be upon you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When a strong man is keeping guard, fully armed, over his own mansion, his property is in safety;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}but, when one still stronger has attacked and overpowered him, he takes away all the weapons on which the other had relied, and divides his spoil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Whoever is not with me is against me, and the person who does not help me to gather is scattering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}No sooner does a foul spirit leave someone, than it passes through places where there is no water, in search of rest; and finding none, it says \uc1\u8220*I will go back to the home which I left\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}but, on coming there, it finds it unoccupied, swept, and put in order.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in, and make their home there; and the last state of that person proves to be worse than the first.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}As Jesus was saying this, a woman in the crowd, raising her voice, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Happy was the mother who bore you and nursed you!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*Rather, happy are those who listen to God\uc1\u8217*s message and keep it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As the crowds increased, Jesus began to speak, \uc1\u8216*This generation is a wicked generation. It is asking a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For, as Jonah became a sign to the people of Nineveh, so will the Son of Man be to this generation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}At the judgment the Queen of the South will rise up with the people of this generation, and will condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to listen to the wisdom of Solomon; and here is more than a Solomon!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}At the judgment the men of Nineveh will stand up with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at Jonah\uc1\u8217*s proclamation; and here is more than a Jonah!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}No one lights a lamp, and then puts it in the cellar or under a basket, but he puts it on the lamp-stand, so that anyone who comes in may see the light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is unclouded, your whole body, also, is lit up; but, as soon as your eye is diseased, your body, also, is darkened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Take care, therefore, that the inner light is not darkness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}If, then, your whole body is lit up, and no corner of it darkened, the whole will be lit up, just as when a lamp gives you light by its brilliance.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}As Jesus finished speaking, a Pharisee asked him to breakfast with him, and Jesus went in and took his place at the table.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The Pharisee noticed, to his astonishment, that Jesus omitted the ceremonial washing before breakfast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But the Master said to him, \uc1\u8216*You Pharisees do, it is true, clean the outside of the cup and of the plate, but inside you yourselves are filled with greed and wickedness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Fools! Did not the maker of the outside make the inside too?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Only give away what is in them in charity, and at once you have the whole clean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}But alas for you Pharisees! You pay tithes on mint, rue, and herbs of all kinds, and pass over justice and love to God. These last you ought to have put into practice without neglecting the first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Alas for you Pharisees! You delight to have the front seat in the synagogues, and to be greeted in the markets with respect.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Alas for you! You are like unsuspected graves, over which men walk unawares.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Here one of the students of the Law interrupted him by saying, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, when you say this, you are insulting us also.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}But Jesus went on, \uc1\u8216*Alas for you, too, you students of the Law! You load people with loads that are too heavy to carry, but do not, yourselves, touch them with one of your fingers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Alas for you! You build the monuments of the prophets whom your ancestors killed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}You are actually witnesses to your ancestors\uc1\u8217* acts and show your approval of them, because, while they killed the prophets, you build tombs for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}That is why the wisdom of God said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I will send to them prophets and apostles,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}some of whom they will persecute and kill, in order that the blood of all the prophets that has been spilt since the creation of the world may be exacted from this generation \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}from the blood of Abel down to the blood of Zechariah, who was slain between the altar and the house of God.\uc1\u8221* Yes, I tell you, it will be exacted from this generation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}Alas for you students of the Law! You have taken away the key of the door of knowledge. You have not gone in yourselves and you have hindered those who try to go in.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}When Jesus left the house, the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees began to press him hard and question him closely on many subjects,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}laying traps for him, so as to seize on anything that he might say.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Meanwhile the people had gathered in thousands, so that they trod on one another, when Jesus, addressing himself to his disciples, began by saying to them, \uc1\u8216*Be on your guard against the leaven \uc1\u8211* that is, the hypocrisy \uc1\u8211* of the Pharisees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There is nothing, however covered up, which will not be uncovered, nor anything kept secret which will not become known.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So all that you have said in the dark will be heard in the light, and what you have spoken in the ear, within closed doors, will be proclaimed on the housetops.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}To you who are my friends I say, Do not be afraid of those who kill the body, but after that can do no more.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I will show you of whom you should be afraid. Be afraid of him who, after killing you, has the power to fling you into Gehenna. Yes, I say, be afraid of him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Are not five sparrows sold for two copper coins? Yet not one of them has escaped God\uc1\u8217*s notice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}No, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Do not be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Everyone, I tell you, who publicly acknowledges me, the Son of Man, also, will acknowledge before God\uc1\u8217*s angels;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but the person who publicly disowns me will be altogether disowned before God\uc1\u8217*s angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Everyone who will say anything against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but for the person who slanders the Holy Spirit there will be no forgiveness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Whenever they take you before the synagogue Courts or the magistrates or other authorities, do not be anxious as to how you will defend yourselves, or what your defence will be, or what you will say;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}for the Holy Spirit will show you at the moment what you ought to say.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Teacher,\uc1\u8217* a man in the crowd said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*tell my brother to share the property with me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Man, who made me a judge or an arbiter between you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And then he added, \uc1\u8216*Take care to keep yourselves free from every form of covetousness; for even in the height of their prosperity a person\uc1\u8217*s true life does not depend on what they have.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then Jesus told them this parable \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*There was once a rich man whose land was very fertile;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and he began to ask himself \uc1\u8220*What will I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This is what I will do,\uc1\u8221* he said; \uc1\u8220*I will pull down my barns and build larger ones, and store all my grain and my goods in them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and I will say to myself, Now you have plenty of good things put by for many years; take your ease, eat, drink, and enjoy yourself.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But God said to the man \uc1\u8220*Fool! This very night your life is being demanded; and as for all you have prepared \uc1\u8211* who will have it?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}So it is with those who lay by wealth for themselves and are not rich to the glory of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*That is why I say to you, Do not be anxious about the life here \uc1\u8211* what you can get to eat; or about your body \uc1\u8211* what you can get to wear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For life is more than food, and the body than its clothes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Think of the ravens \uc1\u8211* they neither sow nor reap; they have neither storehouse nor barn; and yet God feeds them! And how much more precious are you than birds!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But which of you, by being anxious, can prolong your life a moment?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And, if you cannot do even the smallest thing, why be anxious about other things?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Think of the lilies, and how they grow. They neither toil nor spin; yet, I tell you, even Solomon in all his splendour was not robed like one of these.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}If, even in the field, God so clothes the grass which is living today and tomorrow will be thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, you of little faith!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And you \uc1\u8211* do not be always seeking what you can get to eat or what you can get to drink; and do not waver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}These are the things for which all the nations of the world are seeking, and your Father knows that you need them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}No, seek his kingdom, and these things will be added for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So do not be afraid, my little flock, for your Father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Sell what belongs to you, and give in charity. Make yourselves purses that will not wear out \uc1\u8211* an inexhaustible treasure in heaven, where no thief comes near, or moth works ruin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}For where your treasure is, there also will your heart be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Make yourselves ready, with your lamps alight;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}and be like servants who are waiting for their Master\uc1\u8217*s return from his wedding, so that, when he comes and knocks, they may open the door for him at once.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Happy are those servants whom, on his return, the Master will find watching. I tell you that he will make himself ready, and have them take their places at the table, and will come and serve them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Whether it is late at night, or in the early morning that he comes, if he finds all as it should be, then happy are they.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}This you do know, that, had the owner of the house known at what time the thief was coming, he would have been on the watch, and would not have let his house be broken into.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}You must also prepare, for when you are least expecting him the Son of Man will come.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* said Peter, \uc1\u8216*are you telling this parable with reference to us or to everyone?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*Who, then,\uc1\u8217* replied the Master, \uc1\u8216*is that trustworthy steward, the careful man, who will be placed by his master over his establishment, to give them their rations at the proper time?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Happy will that servant be whom his master, when he comes home, will find doing this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}His master, I tell you, will put him in charge of the whole of his property.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}But should that servant say to himself \uc1\u8220*My master is a long time coming,\uc1\u8221* and begin to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink and get drunk,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}that servant\uc1\u8217*s master will come on a day when he does not expect him, and at an hour of which he is unaware, and will flog him severely and assign him his place among the untrustworthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The servant who knows his master\uc1\u8217*s wishes and yet does not prepare and act accordingly will receive many lashes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}while one who does not know his master\uc1\u8217*s wishes, but acts so as to deserve a flogging, will receive but few. From everyone to whom much has been given much will be expected, and from the man to whom much has been entrusted the more will be demanded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}I came to cast fire on the earth; and what more can I wish, if it is already kindled?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}There is a baptism that I must undergo, and how great is my distress until it is over!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Do you think that I am here to bring peace on earth? No, I tell you, but to cause division.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}For from this time, if there are five people in a house, they will be divided, three against two, and two against three.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Father will be opposed to son and son to father, mother to daughter and daughter to mother, mother-in-law to her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law to her mother-in-law.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}And to the people Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*When you see a cloud rising in the west, you say at once \uc1\u8220*There is a storm coming,\uc1\u8221* and come it does.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}And when you see that the wind is in the south, you say \uc1\u8220*It will be burning hot,\uc1\u8221* and so it proves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Hypocrites! You know how to judge of the earth and the sky; how is it, then, that you cannot judge of this time?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}Why don\uc1\u8217*t you yourselves decide what is right?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}When, for instance, you are going with your opponent before a magistrate, on your way to the court do your best to be quit of him; otherwise he might drag you before the judge, then the judge will hand you over to the bailiff of the court, and the bailiff throw you into prison.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}You will not, I tell you, come out until you have paid the very last cent.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Just at that time some people had come to tell Jesus about the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with the blood of their sacrifices.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Do you suppose,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that, because these Galileans have suffered in this way, they were worse sinners than any other Galileans?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}No, I tell you; but, unless you repent, you will all perish as they did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Or those eighteen men at Siloam on whom the tower fell, killing them all, do you suppose that they were worse offenders than any other inhabitants of Jerusalem?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}No, I tell you; but, unless you repent, you will all perish in the same manner.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And Jesus told them this parable \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*A man, who had a fig tree growing in his vineyard, came to look for fruit on it, but could not find any.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he said to his gardener \uc1\u8220*Three years now I have come to look for fruit on this fig tree, without finding any! Cut it down. Why should it rob the soil?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Leave it this one year more, Sir,\uc1\u8221* the man answered, \uc1\u8220*until I have dug round it and manured it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then, if it bears in future, well and good; but if not, you can have it cut down.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Jesus was teaching on a Sabbath in one of the synagogues,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and he saw before him a woman who for eighteen years had suffered from weakness owing to her having an evil spirit in her. She was bent double, and was wholly unable to raise herself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said, \uc1\u8216*Woman, you are released from your weakness.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He placed his hands on her, and she was instantly made straight, and began to praise God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But the synagogue leader, indignant that Jesus had worked the cure on the Sabbath, intervened and said to the people, \uc1\u8216*There are six days on which work ought to be done; come to be cured on one of those, and not on the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*You hypocrites!\uc1\u8217* the Master answered him. \uc1\u8216*Does not everyone of you let your ox or your donkey loose from its manger, and take it out to drink, on the Sabbath?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But this woman, a daughter of Abraham, who has been kept in bondage by Satan for now eighteen years, ought not she to have been released from her bondage on the Sabbath?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As he said this, his opponents all felt ashamed; but all the people rejoiced to see all the wonderful things that he was doing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*What is the kingdom of God like? And to what can I liken it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}It is like a mustard seed which a man took and put in his garden. The seed grew and became a tree, and the wild birds roosted in its branches.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And again Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*To what can I liken the kingdom of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It is like some yeast which a woman took and covered in three pecks of flour, until the whole had risen.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Jesus went through towns and villages, teaching as he went, and making his way towards Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* someone asked, \uc1\u8216*are there but few in the path of salvation?\uc1\u8217* And Jesus answered,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Strive to go in by the narrow door. Many, I tell you, will seek to go in, but they will not be able,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}when once the master of the house has got up and shut the door, while you begin to say, as you stand outside and knock, \uc1\u8220*Sir, open the door for us.\uc1\u8221* His answer will be \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I do not know where you come from.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then you will begin to say \uc1\u8220*We have eaten and drunk in your presence, and you have taught in our streets,\uc1\u8221* and his reply will be \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8220*I do not know where you come from. Leave my presence, all you who are living in wickedness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}There, there will be weeping and grinding of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, while you yourselves are being driven outside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}People will come from East and West, and from North and South, and take their places at the banquet in the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}There are some who are last now who will then be first, and some who are first now who will then be last!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Just then some Pharisees came up to Jesus and said, \uc1\u8216*Go away and leave this place, for Herod wants to kill you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Go and say to that fox \uc1\u8220*Look you, I am driving out demons and will be completing cures today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will have done.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But today and tomorrow and the day after I must go on my way, because it cannot be that a prophet should meet his end outside Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Jerusalem! Jerusalem! You who slays the prophets and stones the messengers sent to you \uc1\u8211* Oh, how often have I wished to gather your children round me, as a hen takes her brood under her wings, and you would not come!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Verily your house is left to you desolate! And never, I tell you, will you see me, until you say \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}On one occasion, as Jesus was going, on a Sabbath into the house of one of the leading Pharisees to dine, they were watching him closely.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There he saw before him a man who was suffering from dropsy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Is it allowable,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, addressing the students of the Law and the Pharisees, \uc1\u8216*to work a cure on the Sabbath, or is it not?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They remained silent. Jesus took hold of the man and cured him, and sent him away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he said to them, \uc1\u8216*Which of you, finding that your son or your ox has fallen into a well, will not immediately pull them out on the Sabbath day?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And they could not make any answer to that.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Observing that the guests were choosing the best places for themselves, Jesus told them this parable \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*When you are invited by anyone to a wedding banquet, do not seat yourself in the best place. Someone of higher rank might have been invited by your host;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and the host who invited you both will come and say to you \uc1\u8220*Make room for this person,\uc1\u8221* and then you will begin in confusion to take the lowest place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}No, when you are invited, go and take the lowest place, so that, when the host who has invited you comes, he may say to you \uc1\u8220*Friend, come higher up\uc1\u8221*; and then you will be honoured in the eyes of all your fellow guests.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For everyone who exalts themselves will be humbled, and everyone who humbles themselves will be exalted.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then Jesus went on to say to the man who had invited him, \uc1\u8216*When you give a breakfast or a dinner, do not ask your friends, or your brothers or sisters, or your relatives, or rich neighbours, because they might invite you in return, and so you should be repaid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No, when you entertain, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and then you will be happy indeed, since they cannot reward you; for you will be rewarded at the resurrection of the just.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}One of the guests heard what he said and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Happy will be the person who will eat bread in the kingdom of God!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*A man was once giving a great dinner. He invited many people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and sent his servant, when it was time for the dinner, to say to those who had been invited \uc1\u8220*Come, for everything is now ready.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They all with one accord began to ask to be excused. The first said to the servant \uc1\u8220*I have bought a field and am obliged to go and look at it. I must ask you to consider me excused.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The next said \uc1\u8220*I have bought five pairs of bullocks, and I am on my way to try them. I must ask you to consider me excused\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}while the next said \uc1\u8220*I am just married, and for that reason I am unable to come.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On his return the servant told his master all these answers. Then in anger the owner of the house said to his servant \uc1\u8220*Go out at once into the streets and alleys of the town, and bring in here the poor, and the crippled, and the blind, and the lame.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Presently the servant said \uc1\u8220*Sir, your order has been carried out, and still there is room.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8220*Go out,\uc1\u8221* the master said, \uc1\u8220*into the roads and hedgerows, and make people come in, so that my house may be filled;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}for I tell you all that not one of those people who were invited will taste my dinner.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}One day, when great crowds of people were walking with Jesus, he turned and said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*If any one comes to me and does not hate their father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yes and even their life, he can be no disciple of mine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Whoever does not carry their own cross, and walk in my steps, can be no disciple of mine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Why, which of you, when you want to build a tower, does not first sit down and reckon the cost, to see if you have enough to complete it? \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Otherwise, if you have laid the foundation and are not able to finish it, everyone who sees it will laugh at you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and say \uc1\u8220*Here is a person who began to build and was not able to finish!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Or what king, when he is setting out to fight another king, does not first sit down and consider if with ten thousand men he is able to meet one who is coming against him with twenty thousand?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And if he cannot, then, while the other is still at a distance, he sends envoys and asks for terms of peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And so with everyone of you who does not bid farewell to all you have \uc1\u8211* you cannot be a disciple of mine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Yes, salt is good; but, if the salt itself should lose its strength, what will be used to season it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}It is not fit either for the land or for the manure heap. People throw it away. Let those who have ears to hear with hear!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}The tax collectors and the outcasts were all drawing near to Jesus to listen to him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}but the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law found fault.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*This man always welcomes outcasts, and takes meals with them!\uc1\u8217* they complained.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Jesus told them this parable \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*Who among you who has a hundred sheep, and has lost one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine out in the open country, and go after the lost sheep until he finds it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And, when he has found it, he puts in on his shoulders rejoicing;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, on reaching home, he calls his friends and his neighbours together, and says \uc1\u8220*Come and rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So, I tell you, there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one outcast who repents, than over ninety-nine religious people, who have no need to repent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Or again, what woman who has ten silver coins, if she loses one of them, does not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and search carefully until she finds it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, when she has found it, she calls her friends and neighbours together, and says \uc1\u8220*Come and rejoice with me, for I have found the coin which I lost.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So, I tell you, there is rejoicing in the presence of God\uc1\u8217*s angels over one outcast who repents.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then Jesus continued, \uc1\u8216*A man had two sons;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and the younger of them said to his father \uc1\u8220*Father, give me my share of the inheritance.\uc1\u8221* So the father divided the property between them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}A few days later the younger son got together all that he had, and went away into a distant land; and there he squandered his inheritance by leading a dissolute life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}After he has spent all that he had, there was a severe famine through all that country, and he began to be in actual want.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So he went and engaged himself to one of the people of that country, who sent him into his fields to tend pigs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He even longed to satisfy his hunger with the bean-pods on which the pigs were feeding; and no one gave him anything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, when he came to himself, he said \uc1\u8220*How many of my father\uc1\u8217*s hired servants have more bread than they can eat, while here am I starving to death!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will get up and go to my father, and say to him \uc1\u8216*Father, I sinned against heaven and against you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I am no longer fit to be called your son; make me one of your hired servants.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And he got up and went to his father. But, while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was deeply moved; he ran and threw his arms round his neck and kissed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8220*Father,\uc1\u8221* the son said, \uc1\u8220*I sinned against heaven and against you; I am no longer fit to be called your son; make me one of your hired servants.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the father turned to his servants and said \uc1\u8220*Be quick and fetch a robe \uc1\u8211* the very best \uc1\u8211* and put it on him; give him a ring for his finger and sandals for his feet;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and bring the fattened calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}for here is my son who was dead, and is alive again, was lost, and is found.\uc1\u8221* So they began making merry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile the elder son was out in the fields; but, on coming home, when he got near the house, he heard music and dancing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and he called one of the servants and asked what it all meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8220*Your brother has come back,\uc1\u8221* the servant told him, \uc1\u8220*and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has him back safe and sound.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}This made him angry, and he would not go in. But his father came out and begged him to do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*No,\uc1\u8221* he said to his father, \uc1\u8220*look at all the years I have been serving you, without ever once disobeying you, and yet you have never given me even a young goat, so that I might have a party with my friends.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But, no sooner has this son of yours come, who has eaten up your property in the company of prostitutes, than you have killed the fattened calf for him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*Child,\uc1\u8221* the father answered, \uc1\u8220*you are always with me, and everything that I have is yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}We could but make merry and rejoice, for here is your brother who was dead, and is alive; who was lost, and is found.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*There was a rich man who had a steward; and this steward was maliciously accused to him of wasting his estate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So the master called him and said \uc1\u8220*What is this that I hear about you? Give in your accounts, for you cannot act as steward any longer.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*What am I to do,\uc1\u8221* the steward asked himself, \uc1\u8220*now that my master is taking the steward\uc1\u8217*s place away from me? I have not strength to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I know what I will do, so that, as soon as I am turned out of my stewardship, people may welcome me into their homes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}One by one he called up his master\uc1\u8217*s debtors. \uc1\u8220*How much do you owe my master?\uc1\u8221* he asked of the first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8220*Four hundred and forty gallons of oil,\uc1\u8221* answered the man. \uc1\u8220*Here is your agreement,\uc1\u8221* he said; \uc1\u8220*sit down at once and make it two hundred and twenty.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And you, the steward said to the next, \uc1\u8220*how much do you owe?\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8220*Seventy quarters of wheat,\uc1\u8221* he replied. \uc1\u8220*Here is your agreement,\uc1\u8221* the steward said; \uc1\u8220*make it fifty-six.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}His master complimented this dishonest steward on the shrewdness of his action. And indeed men of the world are shrewder in dealing with their fellow men than those who have the light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And I say to you \uc1\u8220*Win friends for yourselves with your dishonest money,\uc1\u8221* so that, when it comes to an end, there may be a welcome for you into the Eternal Home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The person who is trustworthy in the smallest matter is trustworthy in a great one also; and the person who is dishonest in the smallest matter is dishonest in a great one also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So, if you have proved untrustworthy with the dishonest money, who will trust you with the true?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And, if you have proved untrustworthy with what does not belong to us, who will give you what is really our own?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No servant can serve two masters, for, either they will hate one and love the other, or else they will attach themselves to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}All this was said within hearing of the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, and they began to sneer at Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*You,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*are the ones who justify themselves before the world, but God can read your hearts; and what is highly esteemed among people may be an abomination in the sight of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The Law and the prophets sufficed until the time of John. Since then the good news of the kingdom of God has been told, and everybody has been forcing their way into it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It would be easier for the heavens and the earth to disappear than for one stroke of a letter in the Law to be lost.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman is an adulterer, and the man who marries a divorced woman is an adulterer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There was once a rich man, who dressed in purple robes and fine linen, and feasted every day in great splendour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Near his gateway there had been laid a beggar named Lazarus, who was covered with sores,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and who longed to satisfy his hunger with what fell from the rich man\uc1\u8217*s table. Even the dogs came and licked his sores.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After a time the beggar died, and was taken by the angels to be with Abraham. The rich man also died and was buried.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}In Hades he looked up in his torment, and saw Abraham at a distance and Lazarus at his side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So he called out \uc1\u8220*Pity me, Father Abraham, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am suffering agony in this flame.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8220*Child,\uc1\u8221* answered Abraham, \uc1\u8220*remember that you in your lifetime received what you thought desirable, just as Lazarus received what was not desirable; but now he has his consolation here, while you are suffering agony.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And not only that, but between you and us there lies a great chasm, so that those who wish to pass from here to you cannot, nor can they cross from there to us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8220*Then, Father,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*I beg you to send Lazarus to my father\uc1\u8217*s house \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For I have five brothers to warn them, so that they may not come to this place of torture also.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8220*They have the writings of Moses and the prophets,\uc1\u8221* replied Abraham; \uc1\u8220*let them listen to them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8220*But, Father Abraham,\uc1\u8221* he urged, \uc1\u8220*if someone from the dead were to go to them, they would repent.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets,\uc1\u8221* answered Abraham, \uc1\u8220*they will not be persuaded, even if someone were to rise from the dead.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*It is inevitable that there should be temptations but sorrow awaits the person who does the tempting!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It would be better for them if they had been flung into the sea with a millstone round their neck, rather than that they should cause even one of these little ones to stumble.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Be on your guard! If your brother or sister does wrong, rebuke them; but if they repent, forgive them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Even if they wrong you seven times a day, but turns to you every time and says \uc1\u8220*I am sorry,\uc1\u8221* you must forgive them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Give us more faith,\uc1\u8217* said the apostles to the Master;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but the Master said, \uc1\u8216*If your faith were only like a mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree \uc1\u8220*Be uprooted and planted in the sea,\uc1\u8221* and it would obey you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Which of you, if he had a servant ploughing, or tending the sheep, would say to him, when he came in from the fields, \uc1\u8220*Come at once and take your place at the table,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Instead of saying \uc1\u8220*Prepare my dinner, and then make yourself ready and serve me while I am eating and drinking, and after that you will eat and drink yourself\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Does he feel grateful to his servant for doing what he is told?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And so with you \uc1\u8211* when you have done all that you have been told, still say \uc1\u8220*We are but useless servants; we have done no more than we ought to have done.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}On the way to Jerusalem Jesus passed between Samaria and Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As he was entering a village, ten lepers met him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Standing still, some distance off, they called out loudly, \uc1\u8216*Jesus! Sir! Pity us!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Jesus saw them, he said, \uc1\u8216*Go and show yourselves to the priest.\uc1\u8217* And, as they were on their way, they were made clean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}One of them, finding he was cured, came back, praising God loudly,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and threw himself on his face at Jesus\uc1\u8217* feet, thanking him for what he had done; and this man was a Samaritan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Were not all the ten made clean? exclaimed Jesus. But the nine \uc1\u8211* where are they?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Were there none to come back and praise God except this foreigner?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Get up,\uc1\u8217* he said to him, \uc1\u8216*and go on your way. Your faith has delivered you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Being once asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God was to come, Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*The kingdom of God does not come in a way that can be seen,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}nor will people say \uc1\u8220*Look, here it is!\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*There it is!\uc1\u8221*; for the kingdom of God is within you!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The day will come,\uc1\u8217* he said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*when you will long to see but one of the days of the Son of Man, and will not see it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}People will say to you \uc1\u8220*There he is!\uc1\u8221* Or \uc1\u8220*Here he is!\uc1\u8221* Do not go and follow them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For, just as lightning will lighten and flare from one side of the heavens to the other, so will it be with the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But first he must undergo much suffering, and he must be rejected by the present generation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}As it was in the days of Noah, so will it be again in the days of the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They were eating and drinking and marrying and being married, up to the very day on which Noah entered the ark, and then the flood came and destroyed them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So, too, in the days of Lot. People were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}but, on the very day on which Lot came out of Sodom, it rained fire and sulphur from the skies and destroyed them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}It will be the same on the day on which the Son of Man reveals himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}On that day, if a person is on their house-top and their goods in the house, they must not go down to get them; nor again must one who is on the farm turn back.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Remember Lot\uc1\u8217*s wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Whoever is eager to get the most out of their life will lose it; but whoever will lose it will preserve it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}On that night, I tell you, of two people on the same bed, one will be taken and the other left;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}of two women grinding grain together, one will be taken and the other left.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}  Some later manuscripts add: There will be two in the field; one will be taken and the other left. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Where will it be, Master?\uc1\u8217* asked the disciples. \uc1\u8216*Where there is a body,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*there will the vultures flock.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}Jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and never despair.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*There was,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*in a certain town a judge, who had no fear of God nor regard for people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In the same town there was a widow who went to him again and again, and said \uc1\u8220*Grant me justice against my opponent.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For a time the judge refused, but afterwards he said to himself \uc1\u8220*Although I am without fear of God or regard for people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}yet, as this widow is so troublesome, I will grant her justice, to stop her from plaguing me with her endless visits.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then the Master added, \uc1\u8216*Listen to what this iniquitous judge says!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And God \uc1\u8211* won\uc1\u8217*t he see that his own people, who cry to him night and day, have justice done them \uc1\u8211* though he holds his hand?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He will, I tell you, give them justice soon enough! Yet, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Another time, speaking to people who were satisfied that they were religious, and who regarded everyone else with scorn, Jesus told this parable \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Two men went up into the Temple Courts to pray. One was a Pharisee and the other a tax-gatherer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The Pharisee stood forward and began praying to himself in this way \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*God, I thank you that I am not like other men \uc1\u8211* thieves, rogues, adulterers \uc1\u8211* or even like this tax-gatherer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I fast twice a week, and give a tenth of everything I get to God.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Meanwhile the tax-gatherer stood at a distance, not venturing even to raise his eyes to heaven, but he kept striking his breast and saying \uc1\u8220*God, have mercy on me, a sinner.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This man, I tell you, went home pardoned, rather than the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, while everyone who humbles himself will be exalted.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Some of the people were bringing even their babies to Jesus, for him to touch them; but, when the disciples saw it, they began to find fault with those who had brought them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Jesus, however, called the little children to him. \uc1\u8216*Let the little children come to me,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and do not hinder them, for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of God belongs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I tell you, unless a man receives the kingdom of God like a child, he will not enter it at all.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And one of the leaders asked Jesus this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Good teacher, what must I do if I am to gain eternal life?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Why do you call me good?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*No one is good but God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You know the commandments \uc1\u8211* Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not say what is false about others, Honour your father and your mother.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*I have observed all these,\uc1\u8217* he replied, \uc1\u8216*from childhood.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Hearing this, Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*There is one thing still lacking in you; sell everything that you have, and distribute to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But the man became greatly distressed on hearing this, for he was extremely rich.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Seeing this, Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*How hard it is for the wealthy to enter the kingdom of God!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}It is easier, indeed, for a camel to get through a needle\uc1\u8217*s eye than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*Then who can be saved?\uc1\u8217* asked those who heard this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*What is impossible with people is possible with God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*But we,\uc1\u8217* said Peter, \uc1\u8216*we left what belonged to us and followed you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*that there is no one who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}who will not receive many times as much in the present, and in the age that is coming eternal life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Gathering the Twelve round him, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Listen! We are going up to Jerusalem; and there everything that is written in the prophets will be done to the Son of Man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For he will be given up to the Gentiles, mocked, insulted and spat on;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}they will scourge him, and then put him to death; and on the third day he will rise again.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}The apostles did not comprehend any of this. His meaning was unintelligible to them and they did not understand what he was saying.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}As Jesus was getting near Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the roadside, begging.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Hearing a crowd going by, the man asked what was the matter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and, when people told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}he shouted out, \uc1\u8216*Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Those who were in front kept telling him to be quiet, but he continued to call out the louder, \uc1\u8216*Son of David, take pity on me!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then Jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. And, when he had come close up to him, Jesus asked him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*What do you want me to do for you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*I want to recover my sight.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}And Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Recover your sight, your faith has delivered you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Instantly he recovered his sight, and began to follow Jesus, praising God. And all the people, on seeing it, gave glory to God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}Jesus entered Jericho and made his way through the town.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There was a man there, known by the name of Zacchaeus, who was a senior tax collector and a rich man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He tried to see what Jesus was like; but, being short, he was unable to do so because of the crowd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So he ran on ahead and climbed into a mulberry tree to see Jesus, for he knew that he must pass that way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Zacchaeus, be quick and come down, for I must stop at your house today.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Zacchaeus got down quickly, and joyfully welcomed him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On seeing this, everyone began to complain, \uc1\u8216*He has gone to stay with a man who is an outcast.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But Zacchaeus stood forward and said to the Master, \uc1\u8216*Listen, Master! I will give half my property to the poor, and, if I have defrauded anyone of anything, I will give him back four times as much.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Salvation has come to this house today,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*for even this man is a son of Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The Son of Man has come to search for those who are lost and to save them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}As the people were listening to this, Jesus went on to tell them a parable. He did so because he was near Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God was going to be proclaimed at once.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He said, \uc1\u8216*A nobleman once went to a distant country to receive his appointment to a kingdom and then return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He called ten of his servants and gave them ten pounds of silver each, and told them to trade with them during his absence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But his subjects hated him and sent envoys after him to say \uc1\u8220*We will not have this man as our king.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}On his return, after having been appointed king, he directed that the servants to whom he had given his money should be summoned, so that he might learn what amount of trade they had done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The first came up, and said \uc1\u8220*Sir, your ten pounds have made a hundred.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*Well done, good servant!\uc1\u8221* exclaimed the master. \uc1\u8220*As you have proved trustworthy in a very small matter, I appoint you governor over ten towns.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When the second came, he said \uc1\u8220*Your ten pounds, Sir, have produced fifty.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So the master said to him \uc1\u8220*And you I appoint over five towns.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Another servant also came and said \uc1\u8220*Sir, here are your ten pounds; I have kept them put away in a handkerchief.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For I was afraid of you, because you are a stern man. You take what you have not planted, and reap what you have not sown.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The master answered \uc1\u8220*Out of your own mouth I judge you, you worthless servant. You knew that I am a stern man, that I take what I have not planted, and reap what I have not sown?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then why didn\uc1\u8217*t you put my money into a bank? And I, on my return, could have claimed it with interest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Take away from him the ten pounds,\uc1\u8221* he said to those standing by, \uc1\u8220*and give them to the one who has the hundred.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8220*But, Sir,\uc1\u8221* they said, \uc1\u8220*he has a hundred pounds already!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*I tell you,\uc1\u8221* he answered, \uc1\u8220*that, to him who has, more will be given, but, from him who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But as for my enemies, these men who would not have me as their king, bring them here and put them to death in my presence.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}After saying this, Jesus went on in front, going up to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Last Days

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It was when Jesus had almost reached Bethphage and Bethany, near the Mount of Olives, that he sent on two of the disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*Go to the village facing us,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and, when you get there, you will find a foal tethered, which no one has yet ridden; untie it and lead it here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And, if anybody asks you \uc1\u8220*Why are you untying it?\uc1\u8221*, you are to say this \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The Master wants it.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So the two who were sent went and found it as Jesus had told them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}While they were untying the foal, the owners asked them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Why are you untying the foal?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}And the two disciples answered \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The Master wants it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Then they led it back to Jesus, and threw their cloaks on the foal and put Jesus on it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}As he went along, the people kept spreading their cloaks in the road.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}When he had almost reached the place where the road led down the Mount of Olives, everyone of the many disciples began in their joy to praise God loudly for all the miracles that they had seen:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Blessed is He who comes \uc1\u8211*our king \uc1\u8211* in the name of the Lord!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Peace in heaven,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and glory on high.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to him, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, restrain your disciples.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*I tell you that if they are silent, the stones will call out.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}When he drew near, on seeing the city, he wept over it, and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*If only you had known, while yet there was time \uc1\u8211* even you \uc1\u8211* the things that make for peace! But now they have been hidden from your sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}For a time is coming when your enemies will surround you with earthworks, and encircle you, and hem you in on all sides;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}they will trample you down and your children within you, and they will not leave in you one stone on another, because you did not know the time of your visitation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Jesus went into the Temple Courts and began to drive out those who were selling,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*Scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*My house will be a house of prayer\uc1\u8221*; but you have made it a den of robbers.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}Jesus continued to teach each day in the Temple Courts; but the chief priests and teachers of the Law were eager to take his life, and so also were the leaders of the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Yet they could not see what to do, for the people all hung on his words.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}On one of these days, when Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple Courts and telling the good news, the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, joined by the elders, confronted him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and addressing him, said, \uc1\u8216*Tell us what authority you have to do these things. Who is it who has given you this authority?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I, too,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus in reply, \uc1\u8216*will ask you one question. Give me an answer to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}It is about John\uc1\u8217*s baptism \uc1\u8211* was it of divine or of human origin?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But they began arguing together, \uc1\u8216*If we say \uc1\u8220*divine,\uc1\u8221* he will say \uc1\u8220*Why didn\uc1\u8217*t you believe him?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But, if we say \uc1\u8220*human,\uc1\u8221* the people will all stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So they answered that they did not know its origin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Then I,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But Jesus began to tell the people this parable \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*A man once planted a vineyard, and then let it out to tenants, and went abroad for a long while.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants, so that they could give him a share of the produce of the vineyard. The tenants, however, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The owner afterwards sent another servant; but the tenants beat and insulted this man too, and sent him away empty-handed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He sent a third; but they wounded this man also, and threw him outside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*What should I do?\uc1\u8221* said the owner of the vineyard. \uc1\u8220*I will send my son, who is very dear to me. Perhaps they will respect him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, on seeing him, the tenants consulted with one another. \uc1\u8220*Here is the heir!\uc1\u8221* they said. \uc1\u8220*Let us kill him, and then the inheritance will become ours.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So they threw him outside the vineyard and killed him. Now what will the owner of the vineyard do to them?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He will come and put those tenants to death, and will let the vineyard to others.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Heaven forbid!\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed when they heard it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Jesus looked at them and said, \uc1\u8216*What then is the meaning of this passage? \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The stone which the builders despised has now itself become the cornerstone.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Everyone who falls on that stone will be dashed to pieces, while anyone on whom it falls \uc1\u8211* it will scatter him as dust.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After this the teachers of the Law and the chief priest were eager to lay hands on Jesus then and there, but they were afraid of the people; for they saw that it was at them that he had aimed this parable.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Having watched their opportunity, they afterwards sent some spies, who pretended to be good men, to catch Jesus in the course of conversation, and so enable them to give him up to the Governor\uc1\u8217*s jurisdiction and authority.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}These spies asked Jesus a question. They said, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, we know that you are right in what you say and teach, and that you do not take any account of a person\uc1\u8217*s position, but teach the way of God honestly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}are we right in paying tribute to the Emperor or not?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Seeing through their deceitfulness, Jesus said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Show me a coin. Whose head and title are on it?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*The Emperor\uc1\u8217*s,\uc1\u8217* they said; and Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*Well then, pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}They could not object to this answer before the people; and, in their wonder at his reply, they held their tongues.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Presently there came up some Sadducees, who maintain that there is no resurrection. Their question was this \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*Teacher, Moses laid down for us in his writings that \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Should a man\uc1\u8217*s married brother die, and should he be childless, the man should take the widow as his wife, and raise up a family for his brother.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Well, there were once seven brothers; of whom the eldest, after taking a wife, died childless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The second and third brothers both took her as their wife;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and so, too, did all seven \uc1\u8211* dying without children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The woman herself was the last to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}About the woman, then \uc1\u8211* at the resurrection, whose wife is she to be, all seven brothers having had her as their wife?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*The men and women of this world,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*marry and are given in marriage;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}but, for those who are thought worthy to attain to that other world and the resurrection from the dead, there is no marrying or being married,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}nor indeed can they die again, for they are like angels and, having shared in the resurrection, they are God\uc1\u8217*s children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}As to the fact that the dead rise, even Moses indicated that, in the passage about the Bush, when he calls the Lord \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Now he is not God of dead people, but of living. For in his sight all are alive.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Well said, teacher!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed some of the teachers of the Law,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}for they did not venture to question him any further.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*How is it that people say that the Christ is to be David\uc1\u8217*s son?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}For David, in the book of Psalms, says himself \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord said to my lord: Sit at my right hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}until I put your enemies as a stool for your feet.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}David, then, calls him \uc1\u8220*lord,\uc1\u8221* so how is he David\uc1\u8217*s son?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}While all the people were listening, Jesus said to the disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*Be on your guard against the teachers of the Law, who delight to walk about in long robes, and like to be greeted in the streets with respect, and to have the best seats in the synagogues, and places of honour at dinner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}These are the men who rob widows of their houses, and make a pretence of saying long prayers. Their sentence will be all the heavier.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}Looking up, Jesus saw the rich people putting their gifts into the chests for the Temple offerings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He saw, too, a widow in poor circumstances putting two small coins into them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I tell you\uc1\u8217*, he said \uc1\u8216*that this poor widow has put in more than all the others;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for everyone else here put in something from what he had to spare, while she, in her need, has put in all she had to live on.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When some of them spoke about the Temple being decorated with beautiful stones and offerings, Jesus said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*As for these things that you are looking at, a time is coming when not one stone will be left on another here. Every one will be thrown down.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So the disciples questioned Jesus, \uc1\u8216*But, teacher, when will this happen? And what sign will there be when this is near?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*See that you are not led astray; for many will take my name, and come saying \uc1\u8220*I am He,\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*The time is close at hand.\uc1\u8221* Do not follow them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, when you hear of wars and disturbances, do not be terrified, for these things must occur first; but the end will not be at once.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then he said to them, \uc1\u8216*Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and there will be great earthquakes, and plagues and famines in various places, and there will be terrible appearances and signs in the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Before all this, they will lay hands on you and persecute you, and they will betray you to synagogues and put you in prison, when you will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then will be your opportunity of witnessing for me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Make up your minds, therefore, not to prepare your defence;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for I will myself give you words, and a wisdom which all your opponents together will be unable to resist or defy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}You will be betrayed even by your parents and brothers and sisters and relatives and friends, and they will cause some of you to be put to death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and you will be hated by everyone because of me my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yet not a single hair of your heads will be lost!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}By your endurance you will win yourselves life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}As soon, however, as you see Jerusalem surrounded by armed camps, then you may know that the hour of her desecration is at hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains, those who are in Jerusalem must leave at once, and those who are in the country places must not go into it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For these are to be the days of vengeance, when all that scripture says will be fulfilled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days! For there will be great suffering in the land, and anger against this people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}They will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be taken prisoners to every land, and Jerusalem will be under the heel of the Gentiles, until their day is over \uc1\u8211* as it will be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}There will be signs, too, in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth despair among the nations, in their dismay at the roar of the sea and the surge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}People\uc1\u8217*s hearts will fail them through dread of what is coming upon the world; for the forces of the heavens will be convulsed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then will be seen the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And, when these things begin to occur, look upwards and lift your heads, for your deliverance will be at hand.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then he taught them a lesson, saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Look at the fig tree and all the other trees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}As soon as they shoot, you know, as you look at them, without being told, that summer is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And so may you, as soon as you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}I tell you that even the present generation will not pass away until all has taken place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Be on your guard or your minds will become dulled by debauches or drunkenness or the anxieties of life, and \uc1\u8220*that day\uc1\u8221* will close on you suddenly like a trap.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}For it will come on all who are living upon the face of the whole earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Be on the watch at all times, and pray that you may have strength to escape all that is destined to happen, and to stand in the presence of the Son of Man.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}During the days, Jesus continued to teach in the Temple Courts, but he went out and spent the nights on the hill called the \uc1\u8220*Mount of Olives.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And all the people would get up early in the morning and come to listen to him in the Temple Courts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}The feast of the unleavened bread, known as the Passover, was near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The chief priest and the teachers of the Law were looking for an opportunity of destroying Jesus, for they were afraid of the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Now Satan took possession of Judas, who was known as Iscariot, and who belonged to the Twelve;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and he went and discussed with the chief priests and officers in charge at the Temple the best way of betraying Jesus to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They were glad of this, and agreed to pay him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So Judas assented, and looked for an opportunity to betray Jesus to them, in the absence of a crowd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When the day of the Festival of the unleavened bread came, on which the Passover lambs had to be killed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Jesus sent forward Peter and John, saying to them, \uc1\u8216*Go and make preparations for our eating the Passover.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Where do you wish us to make preparations?\uc1\u8217* they asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Listen,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*when you have reached the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you; follow him into whatever house he enters;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and you will say to the owner of the house \uc1\u8220*The teacher says to you \uc1\u8211* Where is the room where I am to eat the Passover with my disciples?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The man will show you a large upstairs room, set out; there make preparations.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So Peter and John went on, and found everything just as Jesus had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When the time came, Jesus took his place at the table, and the apostles with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*I have most earnestly wished,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For I tell you that I will not eat it again, until it has had its fulfilment in the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then, on receiving a cup, after saying the thanksgiving, he said, \uc1\u8216*Take this and share it among you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For I tell you that I will not, after today, drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God has come.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke it and gave to them, with the words, \uc1\u8216*This is my body.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}  Some later manuscripts add: which is now to be given on your behalf. Do this in memory of me. And in the same way with the cup, after supper, saying: \uc1\u8216*This cup is the New Covenant made by my blood which is being poured out on your behalf.\uc1\u8217* }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Yet see! The hand of the man who is betraying me is beside me on the table!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}True, the Son of Man is passing, by the way ordained for him, yet alas for that man by whom he is being betrayed!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then they began questioning one another which of them it could be who was going to do this.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And a dispute arose among them as to which of them was to be regarded as the greatest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Jesus, however, said, \uc1\u8216*The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their oppressors are styled \uc1\u8220*Benefactors.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But with you it must not be so. No, let the greatest among you become like the youngest, and him who leads like him who serves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Which is the greater \uc1\u8211* the master at the table or his servant? Is not it the master at the table? Yet I myself am among you as one who serves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You are the men who have stood by me in my trials;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and, just as my Father has assigned me a kingdom, I assign you places,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and be seated on twelve thrones as judges of the twelve tribes of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Simon! Simon! listen. Satan demanded leave to sift you all like wheat,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}but I prayed for you, Simon, that your faith should not fail. And you, when you have returned to me, are to strengthen the others.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* said Peter, \uc1\u8216*with you I am ready to go both to prison and to death.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*I tell you, Peter,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*the cock will not crow today until you have disowned all knowledge of me three times.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Then he said to them all, \uc1\u8216*When I sent you out as my messengers, without either purse, or bag, or sandals, were you in need of anything?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No; nothing,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Now, however,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*he who has a purse must take it and his bag as well; and he who has not must sell his cloak and buy a sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For, I tell you, that passage of scripture must be fulfilled in me, which says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He was counted among the godless\uc1\u8221*; indeed all that refers to me is finding its fulfilment.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*look, here are two swords!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Enough!\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Jesus then went out, and made his way as usual to the Mount of Olives, followed by his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}And, when he reached the spot, he said to them, \uc1\u8216*Pray that you may not fall into temptation.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Then he withdrew about a stone\uc1\u8217*s throw, and knelt down and began to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*Father,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*if it is your pleasure, spare me this cup; only, not my will but your be done.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Presently there appeared to him an angel from heaven, who strengthened him.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Some later manuscripts do not contain verses 43 or 44. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}And, as his anguish became intense, he prayed still more earnestly, while his sweat was like great drops of blood falling on the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Then he rose from praying, and came to the disciples and found them sleeping for sorrow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*Why are you asleep?\uc1\u8217* he asked them. \uc1\u8216*Rise and pray so that you don\uc1\u8217*t fall into temptation.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}While he was still speaking, a crowd appeared in sight, led by the man called Judas, who was one of the Twelve. Judas approached Jesus, to kiss him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}at which Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Judas, is it by a kiss that you betray the Son of Man?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}But when those who were round Jesus saw what was going to happen, they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Master, should we use our swords?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}And one of them struck the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servant and cut off his right ear;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}at which Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Let me at least do this\uc1\u8217*; and, touching his ear, he healed the wound.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}Then, turning to the chief priests and officers in charge at the Temple and the elders, who had come for him, he said, \uc1\u8216*Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}When I was with you day after day in the Temple Courts, you did not lay hands on me; but now your time has come, and the power of darkness.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Those who had taken Jesus prisoner took him away into the house of the high priest. Peter followed at a distance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}But, when they had lit a fire in the centre of the courtyard and had all sat down there, Peter seated himself in the middle of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Presently a maidservant saw him sitting near the blaze of the fire. She looked carefully at him and said, \uc1\u8216*Why, this man was one of his companions!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}But Peter denied it. \uc1\u8216*I do not know him,\uc1\u8217* he replied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}A little while afterwards someone else \uc1\u8211* a man \uc1\u8211* saw him and said, \uc1\u8216*Why, you are one of them!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* Peter said, \uc1\u8216*I am not.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}About an hour later another man declared positively, \uc1\u8216*This man also was certainly with him. Why, he is a Galilean!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}But Peter said, \uc1\u8216*I do not know what you are speaking about.\uc1\u8217* Instantly, while he was still speaking, a cock crowed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}And the Master turned and looked at Peter; and Peter remembered the words that the Master had said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Before a cock has crowed today, you will disown me three times\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}and he went outside and wept bitterly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}The men who held Jesus kept making sport of him and beating him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}They blindfolded him and then questioned him. \uc1\u8216*Now play the prophet,\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*Who was it that struck you?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}And they heaped many other insults on him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}At daybreak the assembly of the elders of the people met \uc1\u8211* both the chief priests and the teachers of the Law \uc1\u8211* and took Jesus before their High Council.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}\uc1\u8216*If you are the Christ,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*tell us so.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*If I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*you will not believe me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}and, if I question you, you will not answer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}But from this hour the Son of Man will be seated on the right hand of God Almighty.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}\uc1\u8216*Are you, then, the Son of God?\uc1\u8217* they all asked. \uc1\u8216*It is true,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*I am.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}At this they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Why do we want any more evidence? We have heard it ourselves from his own lips!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Then they all rose in a body and led Jesus before Pilate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And they began to accuse him, \uc1\u8216*This is a man whom we found misleading our people, preventing them from paying taxes to the Emperor, and giving out that he himself is \uc1\u8220*Christ, a king.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Are you the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217* Pilate asked him. \uc1\u8216*It is true,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But Pilate, turning to the chief priests and the people, said, \uc1\u8216*I do not see anything to find fault with in this man.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But they insisted, \uc1\u8216*He is stirring up the people by his teaching all through Judea; he began with Galilee and has now come here.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Hearing this, Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and, having satisfied himself that Jesus came under Herod\uc1\u8217*s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who also was at Jerusalem at the time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly pleased, for he had been wanting to see him for a long time, having heard a great deal about him; and he was hoping to see some sign given by him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So he questioned him at some length, but Jesus made no reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Meanwhile the chief priests and the teachers of the Law stood by and vehemently accused him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And Herod, with his soldiers, treated Jesus with scorn; he mocked him by throwing a gorgeous robe round him, and then sent him back to Pilate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And Herod and Pilate became friends that very day, for before that there had been ill-will between them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So Pilate summoned the chief priests, and the leading men, and the people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and said to them, \uc1\u8216*You brought this man before me charged with misleading the people; and yet, for my part, though I examined him before you, I did not find this man to blame for any of the things of which you accuse him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}nor did Herod either; for he has sent him back to us. And, as a fact, he has not done anything deserving death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}so I will have him scourged, and then release him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}  Some later manuscripts add: He had to release someone to them at the feast. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But they began to shout as one man, \uc1\u8216*Kill this fellow, but release Barabbas for us.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}(Barabbas was a man who had been put in prison for a riot that had broken out in the city and for murder.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Pilate, however, wanting to release Jesus, called to them again;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but they kept calling out, \uc1\u8216*Crucify, crucify him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Why, what harm has this man done?\uc1\u8217* Pilate said to them for the third time. \uc1\u8216*I have found nothing in him for which he could be condemned to death. So I will have him scourged, and then release him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But they persisted in loudly demanding his crucifixion; and their clamour gained the day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Pilate decided that their demand should be granted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He released the man who had been put in prison for riot and murder, as they demanded, and gave Jesus up to be dealt with as they pleased.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And, as they were leading Jesus away, they laid hold of Simon from Cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, and they put the cross on his shoulders, for him to carry it behind Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}There was a great crowd of people following him, many being women who were beating their breasts and wailing for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So Jesus turned and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Women of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}A time, I tell you, is coming, when it will be said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Happy are the women who are barren, and those who have never borne children or nursed them!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}At that time people will begin to say to the mountains \uc1\u8220*Fall on us,\uc1\u8221* and to the hills \uc1\u8220*Cover us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}If what you see is done while the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}There were two others also, criminals, led out to be executed with Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}When they had reached the place called \uc1\u8220*The Skull,\uc1\u8221* there they crucified Jesus and the criminals, one on the right, and one on the left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Father, forgive them; they do not know what they are doing.\uc1\u8217* His clothes they divided among them by casting lots.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Meanwhile the people stood looking on. Even the leading men said with a sneer, \uc1\u8216*He saved others, let him save himself, if he is God\uc1\u8217*s Christ, his chosen one.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The soldiers, too, came up in mockery, bringing him common wine,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}and saying as they did so, \uc1\u8216*If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Above him were the words \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}One of the criminals who were hanging beside Jesus railed at him. \uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you the Christ? Save yourself and us,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But the other rebuked him. \uc1\u8216*Haven\uc1\u8217*t you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*any fear of God, now that you are under the same sentence?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}And we justly so, for we are only reaping our deserts, but this man has not done anything wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Jesus,\uc1\u8217* he went on, \uc1\u8216*do not forget me when you have come to your kingdom.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*I tell you, this very day you will be with me in Paradise.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}It was nearly midday, when a darkness came over the whole country, lasting until three in the afternoon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}the sun being eclipsed; and the Temple curtain was torn down the middle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Then Jesus, with a loud cry, said, \uc1\u8216*Father, into your hands I commit my spirit.\uc1\u8217* And with these words he expired.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The Roman centurion, on seeing what had happened, praised God, exclaiming, \uc1\u8216*This must have been a good man!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}All the people who had collected to see the sight watched what occurred, and then went home beating their breasts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}All the friends of Jesus had been standing at a distance, with the women who accompanied him from Galilee, watching all this.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Now there was a man of the name of Joseph, who was a member of the Council, and who bore a good and upright character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}(This man had not assented to the decision and action of the Council.) He belonged to Arimathea, a town in Judea, and lived in expectation of the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}He now went to see Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}and, when he had taken it down, he wrapped it in a linen sheet, and laid him in a tomb cut out of stone, in which no one had yet been buried.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}It was the Preparation day, and just before the Sabbath began.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}The women who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee followed, and saw the tomb and how the body of Jesus was laid,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}and then went home, and prepared spices and perfumes.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Risen Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
 During the Sabbath they rested, as directed by the commandment.{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}But very early on the first day of the week they went to the tomb, taking with them the spices that they had prepared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They found that the stone had been rolled away from the tomb;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and, on going into it, they could not find the body{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Some later manuscripts add: of the Lord Jesus. }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}While they were at a loss to account for this, all at once two men stood beside them, in dazzling clothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But, when in their fear the women bowed their faces to the ground, the men said to them, \uc1\u8216*Why are you looking among the dead for him who is living?{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}  Some later manuscripts add: He is not here but he has risen. } Remember how he spoke to you before he left Galilee \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}How he said that the Son of Man must be betrayed into the hands of wicked men, and be crucified, and rise again on the third day.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then they remembered the words of Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and, on returning from the tomb, they told all this to the Eleven and to all the rest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}There were Mary of Magdala, and Joanna, and Mary, the mother of James. The other women, too, spoke about this to the apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}What they said seemed to the apostles mere nonsense, and they did not believe them.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}  Some later manuscripts add: Peter got up and ran to the tomb. Stooping down he saw nothing but the linen wrappings, and he went away, wondering to himself at what had taken place. }
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It happened that very day that two of the disciples were going to a village called Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}talking together, as they went, about all that had just taken place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}While they were talking about these things and discussing them, Jesus himself came up and went on their way with them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}but their eyes were blinded so that they could not recognise him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*What is this that you are saying to each other as you walk along?\uc1\u8217* Jesus asked. They stopped, with sad looks on their faces,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and then one of them, whose name was Cleopas, said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Are you staying by yourself at Jerusalem, that you have not heard of the things that have happened there within the last few days?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*What things do you mean?\uc1\u8217* asked Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Why, about Jesus of Nazareth,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*who, in the eyes of God and all the people, was a prophet, whose power was felt in both his words and actions;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and how the chief priests and our leading men gave him up to be sentenced to death, and afterwards crucified him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But we were hoping that he was the Destined Deliverer of Israel; yes, and besides all this, it is now three days since these things occurred.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And what is more, some of the women among us have greatly astonished us. They went to the tomb at daybreak{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And, not finding the body of Jesus there, came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels who told them that he was alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So some of our number went to the tomb and found everything just as the women had said, but they did not see Jesus.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Then Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Foolish men, slow to accept all that the prophets have said!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Was not the Christ bound to undergo this suffering before entering into his glory?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then, beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them all through the scriptures the passages that referred to himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When they got near the village to which they were walking, Jesus appeared to be going further;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}but they pressed him not to do so. \uc1\u8216*Stay with us,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*for it is getting towards evening, and the sun in already low.\uc1\u8217* So Jesus went in to stay with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}After he had taken his place at the table with them, he took the bread and said the blessing, and broke it, and gave it to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Then their eyes were opened and they recognised him; but he disappeared from their sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*How our hearts glowed,\uc1\u8217* the disciples said to each other, \uc1\u8216*while he was talking to us on the road, and when he explained the scriptures to us!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then they immediately got up and returned to Jerusalem, where they found the Eleven and their companions all together,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}who told them that the Master had really risen, and had appeared to Simon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}So they also related what had happened during their walk, and how they had recognised Jesus at the breaking of the bread.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}While they were still talking about these things, Jesus himself stood among them.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Some later manuscripts add: and said, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you.\uc1\u8217* }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}In their terror and alarm they thought they saw a ghost,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}but Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Why are you so startled? And why do doubts arise in your minds?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Look at my hands and my feet, and you will know that it is I. Feel me, and look at me, for a ghost has not flesh and bones, as you see that I have.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}  Some later manuscripts add: After saying this he showed them his hands and his feet. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}While they were still unable to believe it all, overcome with joy, and were wondering if it were true, Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Have you anything here to eat?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}They handed him a piece of broiled fish,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}and he took it and ate it before their eyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8216*This is what I told you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*when I was still with you \uc1\u8211* that everything that had been written about me in the Law of Moses, the prophets, and the Psalms, must be fulfilled.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Then he enabled them to understand the meaning of the scriptures, saying to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*Scripture says that the Christ will suffer, and that he will rise again from the dead on the third day,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}and that repentance for forgiveness of sins will be proclaimed on his authority to all the nations \uc1\u8211* beginning at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}You yourselves are to be witnesses to all this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}And now I am myself about to send you that which my Father has promised. But you must remain in the city until you have been invested with power from above.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}After this, Jesus led them out as far as Bethany, and there raised his hands and blessed them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}As he was in the act of blessing them, he left them.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Some later manuscripts add: and was carried up into heaven. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}They returned{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Some later manuscripts read: They bowed to the ground before him and returned. } to Jerusalem full of joy;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}and they were constantly in the Temple Courts, blessing God.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 John (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Good News According to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 John

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}In the beginning the Word was;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Word was with God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Word was God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He was in the beginning with God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}through him all things came into being,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and nothing came into being apart from him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}That which came into being in him was life;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the life was the light of humanity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and the light shines in the darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the darkness never overpowered it.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There appeared a man sent from God, whose name was John;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}he came as a witness \uc1\u8211* to bear witness to the light
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so that through him everyone might believe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}He was not the light,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but he came to bear witness to the light.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}That was the true light which enlightens everyone coming into the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He was in the world;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and through him the world came into being \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet the world did not know him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He came to his own \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yet his own did not receive him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But to all who did receive him he gave power to become children of God \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 to those who believe in his name.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For not to natural conception, nor to human instincts, nor to human will did they owe the new life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but to God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the Word became human, and lived among us,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 (We saw his glory \uc1\u8211* the glory of the Only Son sent from the Father),
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 full of love and truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}(John bears witness to him; he cried aloud \uc1\u8211* for it was he who spoke \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*He who is coming after me is now before me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he was ever first\uc1\u8217*);
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}out of his fullness we have all received
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 gift after gift of love;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for the Law was given through Moses,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 love and truth came through Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}No one has ever yet seen God;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 God the only Son, who is ever with the Father \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he has revealed him.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Preparation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When the religious authorities in Jerusalem sent some Priests and Levites to ask John \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Who are you?\uc1\u8217*,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}he told them clearly and simply, \uc1\u8216*I am not the Christ.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*What then?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*Are you Elijah?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*I am not.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Are you \uc1\u8220*the prophet\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217* He answered, \uc1\u8216*No.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Who then are you?\uc1\u8217* they continued. \uc1\u8216*Tell us so that we have an answer to give to those who have sent us. What do you say about yourself?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*I,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*am \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness: make a straight road for the Lord\uc1\u8221*,
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 as the prophet Isaiah said.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}These men had been sent from the Pharisees;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and their next question was, \uc1\u8216*Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ or Elijah or \uc1\u8220*the prophet\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}John\uc1\u8217*s answer was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*I baptize with water, but among you stands one whom you do not know;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}he is coming after me, yet I am not worthy even to unfasten his sandal.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}This happened at Bethany, across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The next day John saw Jesus coming towards him, and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Here is the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I was talking about him when I said \uc1\u8220*After me there is coming a man who ranks ahead of me, because before I was born he already was.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}I did not know who he was, but I have come baptizing with water to make him known to Israel.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}John also said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*I saw the Spirit come down from heaven like a dove and rest on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water, he said to me \uc1\u8220*He on whom you see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him \uc1\u8211* he it is who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}This I have seen myself, and I have declared my belief that he is the Son of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The next day, when John was standing with two of his disciples,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}he looked at Jesus as he passed and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*There is the Lamb of God!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The two disciples heard him say this, and followed Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}But Jesus turned round, and saw them following. \uc1\u8216*What are you looking for?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* they answered (or, as we should say, \uc1\u8220*Teacher\uc1\u8221*), \uc1\u8216*where are you staying?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Come, and you will see,\uc1\u8217* he replied. So they went, and saw where he was staying, and spent that day with him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 It was then about four in the afternoon.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}One of the two, who heard what John said and followed Jesus, was Andrew, Simon Peter\uc1\u8217*s brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}He first found his own brother Simon, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*We have found the Messiah!\uc1\u8217* (a word which means \uc1\u8220*Christ,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Consecrated\uc1\u8221*.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Then he brought him to Jesus. Looking straight at him, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Cephas\uc1\u8217* (which means \uc1\u8220*Peter,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Rock\uc1\u8221*).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}The following day Jesus decided to leave for Galilee. He found Philip, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Philip was from Bethsaida, the same town as Andrew and Peter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}He found Nathanael and said to him, \uc1\u8216*We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the Law, and of whom the prophets also wrote \uc1\u8211* Jesus of Nazareth, Joseph\uc1\u8217*s son!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*Can anything good come out of Nazareth?\uc1\u8217* asked Nathanael. \uc1\u8216*Come and see,\uc1\u8217* replied Philip.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When Jesus saw Nathanael coming towards him, he said, \uc1\u8216*Here is a true Israelite, in whom there is no deceit!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*How do you know me?\uc1\u8217* asked Nathanael. \uc1\u8216*Even before Philip called you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* Nathanael exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*you are the Son of God, you are king of Israel!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}\uc1\u8216*Do you believe in me,\uc1\u8217* asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree? You will see greater things than those!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he added, \uc1\u8216*you will all see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Work in Judaea, Galilee and Samaria

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Two days after this there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and Jesus\uc1\u8217* mother was there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Jesus himself, too, with his disciples, was invited to the wedding.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, when the wine ran short, his mother said to him, \uc1\u8216*They have no wine left.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*What do you want with me?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*My time has not come yet.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}His mother said to the servants, \uc1\u8216*Do whatever he tells you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There were standing there six stone water-jars, in accordance with the Jewish rule of purification, each holding twenty or thirty gallons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Jesus said to the servants, \uc1\u8216*Fill the water-jars with water.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And, when they had filled them to the brim, he added, \uc1\u8216*Now take some out, and carry it to the Master of the feast.\uc1\u8217* The servants did so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, when the Master of the feast had tasted the water which had now become wine, not knowing where it had come from \uc1\u8211* although the servants who had taken out the water knew \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He called the groom and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Everyone puts good wine on the table first, and inferior wine afterwards, when his guests have drunk freely; but you have kept back the good wine till now!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This, the first sign of his mission, Jesus gave at Cana in Galilee, and by it revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}After this, Jesus went down to Capernaum \uc1\u8211* he, his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; but they stayed there only a few days.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then, as the Jewish Passover was near, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In the Temple Courts he found people who were selling bullocks, sheep, and pigeons, and the money changers at their counters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So he made a whip of cords, and drove them all out of the Temple Courts, and the sheep and bullocks as well; he scattered the money of the money changers, and overturned their tables,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and said to the pigeon-dealers, \uc1\u8216*Take these things away. Do not turn my Father\uc1\u8217*s house into a market house.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}His disciples remembered that scripture said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Passion for your house will consume me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then some of the religious authorities asked Jesus, \uc1\u8216*What sign are you going to show us, since you act in this way?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Destroy this temple,\uc1\u8217* was his answer, \uc1\u8216*and I will raise it in three days.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*This Temple,\uc1\u8217* the authorities replied, \uc1\u8216*has been forty-six years in building, and are you going to \uc1\u8220*raise it in three days\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But Jesus was speaking of his body as a temple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Afterwards, when he had risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this; and they believed the passage of scripture, and the words which Jesus had spoken.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}While Jesus was in Jerusalem, during the Passover Festival, many came to trust in him, when they saw the signs of his mission that he was giving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But Jesus did not put himself in their power because he knew what was in their hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He did not need anyone to tell him about people because he could read what was in them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who was a leading man among his people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This man came to Jesus by night, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God; for no one could give such signs as you are giving, unless God were with him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Jesus, \uc1\u8216*unless a person is reborn, they cannot see the kingdom of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*How can a person,\uc1\u8217* asked Nicodemus, \uc1\u8216*be born when they are old? Can they be born a second time?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*unless a person owes their birth to water and Spirit, they cannot enter the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}All that owes its birth to human nature is human, and all that owes its birth to the Spirit is spiritual.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Do not wonder at my telling you that you all need to be reborn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The wind blows wherever it wants, and you can hear the sound it makes, but you do not know where it comes from, or where it goes; it is the same with everyone who owes his birth to the Spirit.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*How can that be?\uc1\u8217* asked Nicodemus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*What! You a teacher of Israel,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and yet do not understand this!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In truth I tell you that we speak of what we know, and state what we have seen; and yet you do not accept our statements.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}If, when I tell you earthly things, you do not believe me, how will you believe me when I tell you of heavenly things?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No one has ascended to heaven, except him who descended from heaven \uc1\u8211* the Son of Man himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And, as Moses lifted up the snake in the desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him may not be lost, but have eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but so that the world might be saved through him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The person who believes in him escapes condemnation, while the person who does not believe in him is already condemned, because they have not believed in the only Son of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The ground of their condemnation is this, that though the light has come into the world, people preferred the darkness to the light, because their actions were wicked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For the person who lives an evil life hates the light, and will not come to it, fearing that their actions will be exposed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but the person who lives by the truth comes into the light, so it can be clearly seen that God is in all they do.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After this, Jesus went with his disciples into the country parts of Judea; and there he stayed with them, and baptized.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}John, also, was baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because there were many streams there; and people were constantly coming and being baptized.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}(For John had not yet been imprisoned).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now a discussion arose between some of John\uc1\u8217*s disciples and a fellow Jew on the subject of purification;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and the disciples came to John and said, \uc1\u8216*Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, and to whom you have yourself borne testimony \uc1\u8211* he, also, is baptizing, and everybody is going to him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}John\uc1\u8217*s answer was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*A person can gain nothing but what is given them from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You are yourselves witnesses that I said \uc1\u8220*I am not the Christ,\uc1\u8221* but \uc1\u8220*I have been sent before him as a messenger.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It is the groom who has the bride; but the groom\uc1\u8217*s friend, who stands by and listens to him, is filled with joy when he hears the groom\uc1\u8217*s voice. This joy I have felt to the full.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}He must become greater, and I less.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}He who comes from above is above all others; but a child of earth is earthly, and his teaching is earthly, too. He who comes from heaven is above all others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He states what he has seen and what he heard, and yet no one accepts his statement.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}They who did accept his statement confirm the fact that God is true.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}For he whom God sent as his messenger gives us God\uc1\u8217*s own teaching, for God does not limit the gift of the Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}The Father loves his Son, and has put everything in his hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The person who believes in the Son has eternal life, while a person who rejects the Son will not even see that life, but remains under God\uc1\u8217*s displeasure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Now, when the Master heard that the Pharisees had been told that he was making and baptizing more disciples than John{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}(Though it was not Jesus himself, but his disciples, who baptized),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}he left Judea, and set out again for Galilee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He had to pass through Samaria,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, on his way, he came to a Samaritan town called Shechem, near the plot of land that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jacob\uc1\u8217*s Spring was there, and Jesus, being tired after his journey, sat down beside the spring, just as he was. It was then about midday.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A woman of Samaria came to draw water; and Jesus said to her \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Give me some to drink,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For his disciples had gone into the town to buy food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*How is it,\uc1\u8217* replied the Samaritan woman, \uc1\u8216*that you who are a Jew ask for water from a Samaritan woman like me?\uc1\u8217* (For Jews do not associate with Samaritans).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*If you knew of the gift of God,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and who it is that is saying to you \uc1\u8220*Give me some water,\uc1\u8221* you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*You have no bucket, Sir, and the well is deep,\uc1\u8217* she said. \uc1\u8216*Where did you get that \uc1\u8220*living water?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Surely you are not greater than our ancestor Jacob who gave us the well, and used to drink from it himself, and his sons, and his cattle!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*All who drink of this water,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*will be thirsty again;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}but whoever once drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst any more; but the water that I will give him will become a spring welling up within him \uc1\u8211* a source of eternal life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Give me this water, Sir,\uc1\u8217* said the woman, \uc1\u8216*so that I may not be thirsty, nor have to come all the way here to draw water.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Go and call your husband,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and then come back.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*I have no husband,\uc1\u8217* answered the woman. \uc1\u8216*You are right in saying \uc1\u8220*I have no husband,\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*For you have had five husbands, and the man with whom you are now living is not your husband; in saying that, you have spoken the truth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*I see, Sir, that you are a prophet!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the woman.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*It was on this mountain that our ancestors worshiped; and yet you Jews say that the proper place for worship is in Jerusalem.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Believe me,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*a time is coming when it will be neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem that you will worship the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}You Samaritans do not know what you worship; we know what we worship, for salvation comes from the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But a time is coming, indeed it is already here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father spiritually and truly; for such are the worshipers that the Father desires.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}God is Spirit; and those who worship him must worship spiritually and truly.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I know,\uc1\u8217* answered the woman, \uc1\u8216*that the Messiah, who is called the Christ, is coming; when once he has come, he will tell us everything.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*I am he,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to her, \uc1\u8216*I who am speaking to you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}At this moment his disciples came up, and were surprised to find him talking with a woman; but none of them asked \uc1\u8220*What do you want?\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Why are you talking with her?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So the woman, leaving her pitcher, went back to the town, and said to the people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Come and see someone who has told me everything that I have done. Can he be the Christ?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And the people left the town and went to see Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Meanwhile the disciples kept saying to him, \uc1\u8216*Take something to eat, Rabbi.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*I have food to eat,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*of which you know nothing.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*Can anyone have brought him anything to eat?\uc1\u8217* the disciples said to one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*My food,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is to do the will of him who sent me, and to complete his work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Don\uc1\u8217*t you say that it still wants four months to harvest? Why, look up, and see how white the fields are for harvest!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Already the reaper is receiving wages and gathering in sheaves for eternal life, so that sower and reaper rejoice together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}For here the proverb holds good \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*One sows, another reaps.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I have sent you to reap that on which you have spent no labour; others have laboured, and you have reaped the results of their labour.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Many from that town came to believe in Jesus \uc1\u8211* Samaritans though they were \uc1\u8211* because the woman had said, \uc1\u8220*He has told me everything that I have done.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}And, when these Samaritans had come to Jesus, they begged him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But far more came to believe in him because of what he said himself,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and they said to the woman, \uc1\u8216*It is no longer because of what you say that we believe in him, for we have heard him ourselves and know that he really is the Saviour of the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}After these two days Jesus went on to Galilee;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}for he himself declared that \uc1\u8220*a prophet is not honoured in his own country.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}When he entered Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, for they had seen all that he did at Jerusalem during the Festival, at which they also had been present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}So Jesus came again to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was one of the king\uc1\u8217*s officers whose son was lying ill at Capernaum.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When this man heard that Jesus had returned from Judea to Galilee, he went to him, and begged him to come down and cure his son; for he was at the point of death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Unless you all see signs and wonders, you will not believe.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*Sir,\uc1\u8217* said the officer, \uc1\u8216*come down before my child dies.\uc1\u8217* And Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*Go, your son is living.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}The man believed what Jesus said to him, and went;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}and, while he was on his way down, his servants met him, and told him that his child was living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}So he asked them at what time the boy began to get better. \uc1\u8216*It was yesterday, about one o\uc1\u8217*clock,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*that the fever left him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}By this the father knew that it was at the very time when Jesus had said to him \uc1\u8220*Your son is living\uc1\u8221*; and he himself, with all his household, believed in Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}This was the second occasion on which Jesus gave a sign of his mission on coming from Judea to Galilee.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Sometime after this there was a Jewish Festival; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There is in Jerusalem, near the sheep-gate, a bath with five colonnades round it. It is called in Hebrew \uc1\u8220*Bethesda.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In these colonnades a large number of sick people were lying \uc1\u8211* blind, lame, and crippled.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}  Some later manuscripts add: for an angel of the Lord went down at certain times into the pool, and stirred up the water. The first person to step in after the stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease they had. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}One man who was there had been crippled for thirty-eight years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus saw the man lying there, and, finding that he had been in this state a long time, said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do you wish to be cured?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*I have no one, Sir,\uc1\u8217* the sick man answered, \uc1\u8216*to put me into the bath when there is a troubling of the water, and, while I am getting to it, someone else steps down before me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Stand up,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*take up your mat, and walk.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The man was cured immediately, and took up his mat and began walking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now it was the Sabbath. So the religious authorities said to the man who had been cured, \uc1\u8216*This is the Sabbath; you must not carry your mat.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*The man who cured me,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*said to me \uc1\u8220*Take up your mat and walk.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Who was it,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*that said to you \uc1\u8220*Take up your mat and walk\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But the man who had been restored did not know who it was; for Jesus had moved away, because there was a crowd there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Afterwards Jesus found the man in the Temple Courts, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*You are cured now; do not sin again, or something worse may happen to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The man went away, and told the authorities that it was Jesus who had cured him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And that was why they began to persecute Jesus \uc1\u8211* because he did things of this kind on the Sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*My Father works to this very hour, and I work also.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This made the authorities all the more eager to kill him, because not only was he doing away with the Sabbath, but he actually called God his own Father \uc1\u8211* putting himself on an equality with God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So Jesus made this further reply, \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself; he does only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does, the Son does also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For the Father loves his Son, and shows him everything that he is doing; and he will show him still greater things \uc1\u8211* so that you will be filled with wonder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For, just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom he pleases.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The Father himself does not judge any one, but has entrusted the work of judging entirely to his Son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}so that everyone may honour the Son, just as they honour the Father. The person who does not honour the Son fails to honour the Father who sent him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}In truth I tell you that the person who listens to my message and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and does not come under condemnation, but has already passed out of death into life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}In truth I tell you that a time is coming, indeed it is already here, when the dead will listen to the voice of the Son of God, and when those who listen will live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For, just as the Father has inherent life within him, so also he has granted to the Son to have inherent life within him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and, because he is Son of Man, he has also given him authority to act as judge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Do not wonder at this; for the time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear his voice,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and will come out \uc1\u8211* those who have done good rising to life, and those who have lived evil lives rising for condemnation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I can do nothing of myself; I judge as I am taught; and the judgment that I give is just, because my aim is not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*If I bear testimony to myself, my testimony is not trustworthy;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}it is another who bears testimony to me, and I know that the testimony which he bears to me is trustworthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}You have yourselves sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But the testimony which I receive is not from people; I am saying this for your salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}He was the Lamp that was burning and shining, and you were ready to rejoice, for a time, in his light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But the testimony which I have is of greater weight than John\uc1\u8217*s; for the work that the Father has given me to carry out \uc1\u8211* the work that I am doing \uc1\u8211* is in itself proof that the Father has sent me as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}The Father who has sent me has himself borne testimony to me. You have neither listened to his voice, not seen his form;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}and you have not taken his message home to your hearts, because you do not believe him whom he sent as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}You search the scriptures, because you think that you find in them immortal life; and, though it is those scriptures that bear testimony to me,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}you refuse to come to me to have life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*I do not receive honour from people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}but I know this of you, that you have not the love of God in your hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}I have come in my Father\uc1\u8217*s name, and you do not receive me; if another comes in his own name, you will receive him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}How can you believe in me, when you receive honour from one another and do not desire the honour which comes from the only God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; your accuser is Moses, on whom you have been resting your hopes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}For, had you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for it was of me that Moses wrote;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}but, if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my teaching?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}After this, Jesus crossed the Sea of Galilee \uc1\u8211* otherwise called the Lake of Tiberias.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}A great crowd of people, however, followed him, because they saw the signs of his mission in his work among those who were sick.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Jesus went up the hill, and sat down there with his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}It was near the time of the Jewish Festival of the Passover.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Looking up, and noticing that a great crowd was coming towards him, Jesus said to Philip, \uc1\u8216*Where are we to buy bread for these people to eat?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he meant to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Even if we spent a years\uc1\u8217* wages on bread,\uc1\u8217* answered Philip, \uc1\u8216*it would not be enough for each of them to have a little.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*There is a boy here,\uc1\u8217* said Andrew, another of his disciples, Simon Peter\uc1\u8217*s brother,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Who has five barley loaves and two fish; but what is that for so many?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Make the people sit down,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. It was a grassy spot; so the people, who numbered about five thousand, sat down,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and then Jesus took the loaves, and, after saying the thanksgiving, distributed them to those who were sitting down; and the same with the fish, giving the people as much as they wanted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When they were satisfied, Jesus said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Collect the broken pieces that are left, so that nothing may be wasted.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The disciples did so, and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves, which were left after all had eaten.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When the people saw the signs which Jesus gave, they said, \uc1\u8216*This is certainly the prophet who was to come into the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But Jesus, having discovered that they were intending to come and carry him off to make him king, went again up the hill, quite alone.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, getting into a boat, began to cross to Capernaum. By this time darkness had set in, and Jesus had not yet come back to them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}the sea, too, was getting rough, for a strong wind was blowing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When they had rowed three or four miles, they caught sight of him walking on the water and approaching the boat, and they were frightened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*It is I; do not be afraid!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And after this they were glad to take him into the boat; and the boat at once arrived off the shore, for which they had been making.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The people who remained on the other side of the sea had seen that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not gone into it with his disciples, but that they had left without him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Some boats, however, had come from Tiberias, from near the spot where they had eaten the bread after the Master had said the thanksgiving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So, on the next day, when the people saw that Jesus was not there, or his disciples either, they themselves got into the boats, and went to Capernaum to look for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And, when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said, \uc1\u8216*When did you get here, Rabbi?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*it is not because of the signs which you saw that you are looking for me, but because you had the bread to eat and were satisfied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that lasts for eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you; for on him the Father \uc1\u8211* God himself \uc1\u8211* has set the seal of his approval.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*How,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*are we to do the work that God wants us to do?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*The work that God wants you to do,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is to believe in him whom God sent as his messenger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*What sign, then,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*are you giving, which we may see, and so believe you? What is the work that you are doing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Our ancestors had the manna to eat in the desert; as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He gave them bread from heaven to eat.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Moses did not give you the bread from heaven, but my Father does give you the true bread from heaven;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}for the bread that God gives is that which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*give us that bread always!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*I am the life-giving bread,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*whoever comes to me will never be hungry, and whoever believes in me will never thirst again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}But, as I have said already, you have seen me, and yet you do not believe in me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}All those whom the Father gives me will come to me; and no one who comes to me will I ever turn away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}For I have come down from heaven, to do, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and his will is this \uc1\u8211* that I should not lose one of all those whom he has given me, but should raise them up at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For it is the will of my Father that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have immortal life; and I myself will raise him up at the Last day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}The people began murmuring against Jesus for saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I am the bread which came down from heaven.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*Is not this Jesus, Joseph\uc1\u8217*s son,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*whose father and mother we know? How is it that he now says that he has come down from heaven?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}\uc1\u8216*Do not murmur among yourselves,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus in reply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}\uc1\u8216*No one can come to me, unless the Father who sent me draws him to me; and I will raise him up at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}It is said in the prophets \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*And they will all be taught by God.\uc1\u8221* Everyone who is taught by the Father and learns from him comes to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Not that anyone has seen the Father, except him who is from God \uc1\u8211* he has seen the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}In truth I tell you, the person who believes in me has eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}I am the life-giving bread.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}Your ancestors ate the manna in the desert, and yet died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}The bread that comes down from heaven is such that whoever eats of it will never die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}I am the living bread that has come down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, they will live for ever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}They began disputing with one another, \uc1\u8216*How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh to eat?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have not life within you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}Everyone who takes my flesh for their food, and drinks my blood, has eternal life; and I will raise them up at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}For my flesh is true food, and my blood true drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Everyone who takes my flesh for their food, and drinks my blood, remains united to me, and I to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}As the living Father sent me as his messenger, and as I live because the Father lives, so the person who takes me for their food will live because I live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}That is the bread which has come down from heaven \uc1\u8211* not such as your ancestors ate, and yet died; the person who takes this bread for their food will live for ever.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}All this Jesus said in a synagogue, when he was teaching in Capernaum.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}On hearing it, many of his disciples said, \uc1\u8216*This is harsh doctrine! Who can bear to listen to it?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 61}But Jesus, aware that his disciples were murmuring about it, said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 62}\uc1\u8216*Is this a hindrance to you? What, then, if you should see the Son of Man ascending where he was before?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 63}It is the Spirit that gives life; human strength achieves nothing. In the teaching that I have been giving you there is Spirit and there is life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 64}Yet there are some of you who do not believe in me.\uc1\u8217* For Jesus knew from the first who they were that did not believe in him, and who it was that would betray him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 65}and he added, \uc1\u8216*This is why I told you that no one can come to me, unless enabled by the Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 66}After this many of his disciples drew back, and did not go about with him any longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 67}So Jesus said to the Twelve, \uc1\u8216*Do you also wish to leave me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 68}But Simon Peter answered, \uc1\u8216*Master, to whom would we go? Eternal life is in your teaching;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 69}and we have learned to believe and to know that you are the Holy One of God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 70}\uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t I myself choose you to be the Twelve?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and yet, even of you, one is playing the devil\uc1\u8217*s part.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 71}He meant Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, who was about to betray him, though he was one of the Twelve.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}After this, Jesus went about in Galilee, for he would not do so in Judea, because the religious authorities (in Jerusalem) were eager to put him to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}his brothers said to him, \uc1\u8216*Leave this part of the country, and go into Judea, so that your disciples, as well as we, may see the work that you are doing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For no one does a thing privately, if they are seeking to be widely known. Since you do these things, you should show yourself publicly to the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For even his brothers did not believe in him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*My time,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is not come yet, but your time is always here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The world cannot hate you, but it does hate me, because I testify that its ways are evil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Go yourselves up to the Festival; I am not going to this Festival yet, because my time has not yet come.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After telling them this, he stayed on in Galilee.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But, when his brothers had gone up to the Festival, Jesus also went up \uc1\u8211* not publicly, but privately.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The authorities were looking for him at the Festival and asking \uc1\u8220*Where is he?\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and there were many whispers about him among the people, some saying \uc1\u8220*He is a good man;\uc1\u8221* others, \uc1\u8220*No! He is leading the people astray.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No one, however, spoke freely about him, because they were afraid of the authorities.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}About the middle of the Festival week, Jesus went up into the Temple Courts, and began teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The authorities were astonished. \uc1\u8216*How has this man got his learning,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*when he has never studied?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So, in reply, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*My teaching is not my own; it is his who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If anyone has the will to do God\uc1\u8217*s will, they will find out whether my teaching is from God, or whether I speak on my own authority.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The person who speaks on their own authority seeks honour for themselves; but the one who seeks the honour of him who sent him is sincere, and there is nothing false in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Was not it Moses who gave you the Law? Yet not one of you obeys it! Why are you seeking to put me to death?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*You must be possessed by a demon!\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed. \uc1\u8216*Who is seeking to put you to death?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*There was one thing I did,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*at which you are all still wondering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But that is why Moses has instituted circumcision among you \uc1\u8211* not, indeed, that it began with him, but with our ancestors \uc1\u8211* and that is why you circumcise even on a Sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When a man receives circumcision on a Sabbath to prevent the Law of Moses from being broken, how can you be angry with me for making a man sound and well on a Sabbath?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Do not judge by appearances; judge justly.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}At this some of the people of Jerusalem exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Is not this the man who they are seeking to put to death?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Yet here he is, speaking out boldly, and they say nothing to him! Is it possible that our leading men have really discovered that he is the Christ?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Yet we know where this man is from; but, when the Christ comes, no one will be able to tell where he is from.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Therefore, Jesus, as he was teaching in the Temple Courts, raised his voice and said, \uc1\u8216*Yes; you know me and you know where I am from. Yet I have not come on my own authority, but he who sent me may be trusted; and him you do not know.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I do know him, for it is from him that I have come, and he sent me as his messenger.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}So they sought to arrest him; but no one touched him, for his time was not come yet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Many of the people, however, believed in him. \uc1\u8216*When the Christ comes,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*will he give more signs of his mission than this man has given?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The Pharisees heard the people whispering about him in this way, and so the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}at which Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*I will be with you but a little longer, and then I am going to him who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}You will look for me, and you will not find me; and you will not be able to come where I will be.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Where is this man going,\uc1\u8217* the people asked one another, \uc1\u8216*that we would not find him? Will he go to our countrymen abroad, and teach foreigners?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}What does he mean by saying \uc1\u8220*You will look for me, and you will not find me; and you will not be able to come where I will be\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}On the last and greatest day of the Festival, Jesus, who was standing by, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*If anyone is thirsty, they should come to me and drink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}From the heart of those who believe in me will flow, as is said in scripture, rivers of living water.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}(By this he meant the Spirit, which those who had believed in him were to receive; for the Spirit had not yet come, because Jesus had not yet been exalted.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Some of the people, when they heard these words, said, \uc1\u8216*This is certainly the Prophet!\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}others said, \uc1\u8216*the Christ!\uc1\u8217*; but some asked, \uc1\u8216*What! Does the Christ come from Galilee?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Is not it said in scripture that it is of the descendants of David, and from Bethlehem, the village to which David belonged, that the Christ is to come?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}So there was a sharp division among the people because of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Some of them wanted to arrest him, and yet no one touched him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}When the officers returned to the chief priests and Pharisees, they were asked, \uc1\u8216*Why have you not brought him?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}\uc1\u8216*No one ever spoke as he speaks!\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}\uc1\u8216*What! Have you been led astray too?\uc1\u8217* the Pharisees replied.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*Have any of our leading men believed in him, or any of the Pharisees?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}As for these people who do not know the Law \uc1\u8211* they are cursed!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But one of their number, Nicodemus, who before this had been to see Jesus, said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}\uc1\u8216*Does our Law pass judgment on a person without first giving them a hearing, and finding out what they have been doing?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8216*Are you also from Galilee?\uc1\u8217* they retorted. \uc1\u8216*Search, and you will find that no prophet is to arise in Galilee!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}And everyone went home{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}except Jesus, who went to the Mount of Olives{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   This passage is inserted in some manuscripts from an ancient source, and found either after John 7:53 or after Luke 21:38 or elsewhere. }.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But he went again into the Temple Courts early in the morning, and all the people came to him; and he sat down and taught them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Presently, however, the Teachers of the Law and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery, and placed her in the middle of the Court,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Teacher, this woman was found in the act of adultery.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now Moses, in the Law, commanded us to stone such women to death; what do you say?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They said this to test him, in order to have a charge to bring against him. But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on the ground with his finger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}However, as they continued asking him, he raised himself, and said, \uc1\u8216*Let the person among you who has never done wrong throw the first stone at her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When they heard that, they went out one by one, beginning with the eldest; and Jesus was left alone with the woman in the middle of the Court.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Raising himself, Jesus said to her, \uc1\u8216*Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*No one, Sir,\uc1\u8217* she answered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Neither do I condemn you,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus \uc1\u8216*go, and do not sin again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Jesus again addressed the people. \uc1\u8216*I am the light of the world,\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*The person who follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You are bearing testimony to yourself!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the Pharisees, \uc1\u8216*your testimony is not trustworthy.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*Even if I bear testimony to myself,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*my testimony is trustworthy; for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you do not know where I come from, nor where I am going.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}You judge by appearances; I judge no one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yet, even if I were to judge, my judgment would be trustworthy; because I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Why, in your own Law it is said that the testimony of two persons is trustworthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I, who bear testimony to myself, am one, and the Father who sent me also bears testimony to me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Where is your father, then?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*You know neither me nor my Father,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus. \uc1\u8216*If you had known me, you would have also known my Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These statements Jesus made in the Treasury, while teaching in the Temple Courts. Yet no one arrested him, for his time had not then come.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Jesus again spoke to the people. \uc1\u8216*I am going away,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and you will look for me, but you will die in your sin; you cannot come where I am going.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*Is he going to kill himself,\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*that he says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You cannot go where I am going\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*You,\uc1\u8217* added Jesus, \uc1\u8216*are from below, I am from above; you are of this present world, I am not;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and so I told you that you would die in your sins, for, unless you believe that I am what I am, you will die in your sins.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*Who are you?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*Why ask exactly what I have been telling you?\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*I have still much that concerns you to speak of and to pass judgment on; yet he who sent me may be trusted, and I speak to the world only of the things which I have heard from him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}They did not understand that he meant the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will understand that I am what I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but that I say just what the Father has taught me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Moreover, he who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone; for I always do what pleases him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}While he was speaking in this way, many came to believe in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}So Jesus went on to say to those who had believed him, \uc1\u8216*If you remain constant to my message, you are truly my disciples;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and you will find out the truth, and the truth will set you free.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*We are descendants of Abraham,\uc1\u8217* was their answer, \uc1\u8216*and have never yet been in slavery to anyone. What do you mean by saying \uc1\u8220*you will be set free\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*everyone who sins is a slave to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And a slave does not remain in the home always; but a son remains always.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}If, then, the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}I know that you are descendants of Abraham; yet you are seeking to put me to death, because my message finds no place in your hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I tell you what I have myself seen in the presence of my Father; and you, in the same way, do what you have learned from your father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Our father is Abraham,\uc1\u8217* was their answer. \uc1\u8216*If you are Abraham\uc1\u8217*s children,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*do what Abraham did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But, as it is, you are seeking to put me to death \uc1\u8211* a man who has told you the truth as he heard it from God. Abraham did not act in that way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}You are doing what your own father does.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We are not bastards,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*we have one Father \uc1\u8211* God himself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}\uc1\u8216*If God were your Father,\uc1\u8217* Jesus replied, \uc1\u8216*you would have loved me, for I came out from God, and now am here; and I have not come of myself, but he sent me as his messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}How is it that you do not understand what I say? It is because you cannot bear to listen to my message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}As for you, you are children of your father the devil, and you are determined to do what your father loves to do. He was a murderer from the first, and did not stand by the truth, because there is no truth in him. Whenever he lies, he does what is natural to him; because he is a liar, and the father of lying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}But, as for me, it is because I speak the truth to you that you do not believe me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Which of you can convict me of sin? Why then don\uc1\u8217*t you believe me, if I am speaking truth?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The person who comes from God listens to God\uc1\u8217*s teaching; the reason why you do not listen is because you do not come from God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}\uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t we right, after all,\uc1\u8217* replied the people, \uc1\u8216*in saying that you are a Samaritan, and are possessed by a demon?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8216*I am not possessed by a demon,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*but I am honouring my Father; and yet you dishonour me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Not that I am seeking honour for myself; there is one who is seeking my honour, and he decides.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}In truth I tell you, if anyone lays my message to heart, he will never really die.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}\uc1\u8216*Now we are sure that you are possessed by a demon,\uc1\u8217* the people replied. \uc1\u8216*Abraham died, and so did the prophets; and yet you say \uc1\u8220*If anyone lays my message to heart, they will never know death.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}Are you greater than our ancestor Abraham, who died? And the prophets died too. Whom do you make yourself out to be?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}\uc1\u8216*If I do honour to myself,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*such honour counts for nothing. It is my Father who does me honour \uc1\u8211* and you say that he is your God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}and yet you have not learned to know him; but I know him; and, if I were to say that I do not know him, I should be a liar like you; but I do know him, and I lay his message to heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}Your ancestor Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day; and he did see it, and was glad.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}\uc1\u8216*You are not fifty years old yet,\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*and have you seen Abraham?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*before Abraham existed I was.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}At this they took up stones to throw at him; but Jesus hid himself, and left the Temple Courts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}As Jesus passed by, he saw a man who had been blind from his birth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* asked his disciples, \uc1\u8216*who was it that sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Neither the man nor the parents,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but he was born blind so that the work of God should be made plain in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}We must do the work of him who sent me, while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Saying this, Jesus spat on the ground, made some paste with the saliva, and put it on the man\uc1\u8217*s eyes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Go,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and wash your eyes in the Bath of Siloam\uc1\u8217* (a word which means \uc1\u8220*messenger\uc1\u8221*). So the man went and washed his eyes, and returned able to see.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}His neighbours, and those who had formerly known him by sight as a beggar, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Is not this the man who used to sit and beg?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* some said, \uc1\u8216*it is\uc1\u8217*; while others said, \uc1\u8216*No, but he is like him.\uc1\u8217* The man himself said, \uc1\u8216*I am he.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*How did you get your sight, then?\uc1\u8217* they asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*The man whom they call Jesus,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*made a paste, and anointed my eyes, and said to me \uc1\u8220*Go to Siloam and wash your eyes.\uc1\u8221* So I went and washed my eyes, and gained my sight.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Where is he?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*I do not know,\uc1\u8217* he answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}They took the man, who had been blind, to the Pharisees.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Now it was a Sabbath when Jesus made the paste and gave him his sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So the Pharisees also questioned the man as to how he had gained his sight. \uc1\u8216*He put a paste on my eyes,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*and I washed them, and I can see.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*The man cannot be from God,\uc1\u8217* said some of the Pharisees, \uc1\u8216*for he does not keep the Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*How is it possible,\uc1\u8217* retorted others, \uc1\u8216*for a bad man to give signs like this?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So there was a difference of opinion among them, and they again questioned the man. \uc1\u8216*What do you yourself say about him, for it is to you that he has given sight?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The religious authorities, however, refused to believe that he had been blind and had gained his sight, until they had called his parents and questioned them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Is this your son,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*who you say was born blind? If so, how is it that he can see now?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*We know that this is our son,\uc1\u8217* answered the parents, \uc1\u8216*and that he was born blind;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but how it is that he can see now we do not know; nor do we know who it was that gave him his sight. Ask him \uc1\u8211* he is old enough \uc1\u8211* he will tell you about himself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}His parents spoke in this way because they were afraid of the authorities; for the authorities had already agreed that, if anyone should acknowledge Jesus as the Christ, he should be expelled from their synagogues.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}This was why his parents said \uc1\u8220*He is old enough; ask him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So the authorities again called the man who had been blind, and said to him, \uc1\u8216*Give God the praise; we know that this is a bad man.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I know nothing about his being a bad man,\uc1\u8217* he replied. \uc1\u8216*One thing I do know, that although I was blind, now I can see.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*What did he do to you?\uc1\u8217* they asked. \uc1\u8216*How did he give you your sight?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*I told you just now,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Surely you also do not want to become his disciples?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*You are his disciple,\uc1\u8217* they retorted scornfully. \uc1\u8216*But we are disciples of Moses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}We know that God spoke to Moses; but, as for this man, we do not know where he comes from.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*Well,\uc1\u8217* the man replied, \uc1\u8216*this is very strange; you do not know where he comes from, and yet he has given me my sight!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}We know that God never listens to bad people, but, when a person is god-fearing and does God\uc1\u8217*s will, God listens to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Since the world began, such a thing was never heard of as anyone\uc1\u8217*s giving sight to a person born blind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}If this man had not been from God, he could not have done anything at all.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*You,\uc1\u8217* they retorted, \uc1\u8216*were born totally depraved; and are you trying to teach us?\uc1\u8217* So they expelled him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Jesus heard of their having put him out; and, when he had found the man, he asked, \uc1\u8216*Do you believe in the Son of Man?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Tell me who he is, Sir,\uc1\u8217* he replied, \uc1\u8216*so that I may believe in him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Not only have you seen him,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but it is he who is now speaking to you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Then, Sir, I do believe,\uc1\u8217* said the man, bowing to the ground before him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and Jesus added, \uc1\u8216*It was to put people to the test that I came into this world, in order that those that cannot see should see, and that those that can see should become blind.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Hearing this, some of the Pharisees who were with him said, \uc1\u8216*Then are we blind too?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*If you had been blind,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*you would have had no sin to answer for; but, as it is, you say \uc1\u8220*We can see,\uc1\u8221* and so your sin remains.{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}In truth I tell you, whoever does not go into the sheepfold through the door, but climbs up at some other place, that person is a thief and a robber;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}but the person who goes in through the door is shepherd to the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For him the watchman opens the door; and the sheep listen to his voice; and he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When he has brought them all out, he walks in front of them, and his sheep follow him, because they know his voice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They will not follow a stranger, but will run away from him; because they do not know a stranger\uc1\u8217*s voice.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}This was the allegory that Jesus told them, but they did not understand of what he was speaking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he continued, \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you, I am the door for the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All who came before me were thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not listen to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I am the door; he who goes in through me will be safe, and he will go in and out and find pasture.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The thief comes only to steal, to kill, and to destroy; I have come so that they may have life, and may have it in greater fullness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The hired man who is not a shepherd, and who does not own the sheep, when he sees a wolf coming, leaves them and runs away; then the wolf seizes them, and scatters the flock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}He does this because he is only a hired man and does not care about the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am the good shepherd; and I know my sheep, and my sheep know me \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Just as the Father knows me and I know the Father \uc1\u8211* and I lay down my life for the sheep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I have other sheep besides, which do not belong to this fold; I must lead them also, and they will listen to my voice; and they will become one flock under one shepherd.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This is why the Father loves me, because I lay down my life \uc1\u8211* to receive it again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}No one took it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to receive it again. This is the command which I received from my Father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In consequence of these words a difference of opinion again arose among the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Many of them said, \uc1\u8216*He is possessed by a demon and is mad; why do you listen to him?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Others said, \uc1\u8216*This is not the teaching of one who is possessed by a demon. Can a demon give sight to the blind?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Soon after this the Festival of the Rededication was held at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}It was winter; and Jesus was walking in the Temple Courts, in the Colonnade of Solomon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}when the people gathered round him, and said, \uc1\u8216*How long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us so frankly.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I have told you so,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and you do not believe me. The work that I am doing in my Father\uc1\u8217*s name bears testimony to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But you do not believe me, because you are not of my flock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and I give them eternal life, and they will not be lost; nor will anyone snatch them out of my hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}What my Father has entrusted to me is more than all else; and no one can snatch anything out of the Father\uc1\u8217*s hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The Father and I are one.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Some of the people again brought stones to throw at him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and seeing this, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*I have done before your eyes many good actions, inspired by the Father; for which of them would you stone me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}\uc1\u8216*It is not for any good action that we would stone you,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*but for blasphemy; and because you, who are only a man, make yourself out to be God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Are there not,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*these words in your Law \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I said, You are gods\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}If those to whom God\uc1\u8217*s word were addressed were said to be \uc1\u8220*gods\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* and scripture cannot be set aside \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}do you say of one whom the Father has consecrated and sent as his messenger to the world \uc1\u8220*You are blaspheming,\uc1\u8221* because I said \uc1\u8220*I am God\uc1\u8217*s Son\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}If I am not doing the work that my Father is doing, do not believe me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}if I am doing it, even though you do not believe me, believe what that work shows; so that you may understand, and understand more and more clearly, that the Father is in union with me, and I with the Father.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The authorities again sought to arrest him; but he escaped their hands.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then Jesus again crossed the Jordan to the place where John used to baptize at first, and stayed there some time, during which many people came to see him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8216*John gave no sign of his mission,\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*But everything that he said about this man was true.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}And many learned to believe in Jesus there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Now a man named Lazarus, of Bethany, was lying ill; he belonged to the same village as Mary and her sister Martha.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This Mary, whose brother Lazarus was ill, was the Mary who anointed the Master with perfume, and wiped his feet with her hair.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The sisters, therefore, sent this message to Jesus \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Master, your friend is ill\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and, when Jesus heard it, he said, \uc1\u8216*This illness is not to end in death, but is to redound to the honour of God, in order that the Son of God may be honoured through it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Jesus loved Martha and her sister, and Lazarus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yet, when he heard of the illness of Lazarus, he still stayed two days in the place where he was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then, after that, he said to his disciples, \uc1\u8216*Let us go to Judea again.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Rabbi,\uc1\u8217* they replied, \uc1\u8216*the authorities there were but just now seeking to stone you; and are you going there again?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Are not there twelve hours in the day?\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*If someone walks about in the daytime, they don\uc1\u8217*t stumble, because they can see the light of the sun;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but, if they walk about at night, they stumble, because they have not the light.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And, when he had said this, he added, \uc1\u8216*Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I am going so that I may wake him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*If he has fallen asleep, Master, he will get well,\uc1\u8217* said the disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But Jesus meant that he was dead; they, however, supposed that he was speaking of natural sleep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he said to them plainly, \uc1\u8216*Lazarus is dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may learn to believe in me. But let us go to him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At this, Thomas, who was called \uc1\u8220*The Twin,\uc1\u8221* said to his fellow disciples, \uc1\u8216*Let us go too, so that we may die with him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When Jesus reached the place, he found that Lazarus had been four days in the tomb already.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Bethany being only about two miles from Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}a number of the people had come there to comfort Martha and Mary because of their brother\uc1\u8217*s death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary sat quietly at home.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* Martha said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*if you had been here, my brother would not have died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Even now, I know that God will grant you whatever you ask him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Your brother will rise to life,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*I know that he will,\uc1\u8217* replied Martha, \uc1\u8216*in the resurrection at the Last day.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I am the resurrection and the life,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*He who believes in me will live, though he die;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and he who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}\uc1\u8216*Yes Master,\uc1\u8217* she answered. \uc1\u8216*I have learned to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}After saying this, Martha went and called her sister Mary, and whispered, \uc1\u8216*The teacher is here, and is asking for you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}As soon as Mary heard that, she got up quickly, and went to meet him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Jesus had not then come into the village, but was still at the place where Martha had met him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}So the people, who were in the house with Mary, comforting her, when they saw her get up quickly and go out, followed her, thinking that she was going to the tomb to weep there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}When Mary came where Jesus was and saw him, she threw herself at his feet. \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* she exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*if you had been here, my brother would not have died!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}When Jesus saw her weeping, and the people who had come with her weeping also, he groaned deeply, and was greatly distressed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Where have you buried him?\uc1\u8217* he asked. \uc1\u8216*Come and see, Master,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Jesus burst into tears.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*How he must have loved him!\uc1\u8217* the people exclaimed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}but some of them said, \uc1\u8216*Could not this man, who gave sight to the blind man, have also prevented Lazarus from dying?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Again groaning inwardly, Jesus came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone lay against the mouth of it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*Move the stone away,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Master,\uc1\u8217* said Martha, the sister of the dead man, \uc1\u8216*by this time the smell must be offensive, for this is the fourth day since his death.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t I tell you,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*that, if you would believe in me, you should see the glory of God?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}So they moved the stone away; and Jesus, with uplifted eyes, said, \uc1\u8216*Father, I thank you that you have heard my prayer;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}I know that you always hear me; but I say this for the sake of the people standing near, so that they may believe that you has sent me as your messenger.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}Then, after saying this, Jesus called in a loud voice, \uc1\u8216*Lazarus! Come out!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}The dead man came out, wrapped hand and foot in a winding-sheet; his face, too, had been wrapped in a cloth. \uc1\u8216*Set him free,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and let him go.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}In consequence of this, many of the people, who had come to visit Mary and had seen what Jesus did, put their faith in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Some of them, however, went to the Pharisees, and told them what he had done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}The chief priests and the Pharisees called a meeting of the High Council, and said, \uc1\u8216*What are we to do, now that this man is giving so many signs?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}If we allow him to continue as we are doing, everyone will believe in him; and the Romans will come and will take from us both our Temple and our nation.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}One of them, however, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}\uc1\u8216*You are utterly mistaken. You do not consider that it is better for you that one person should die for the people, rather than the whole nation should be destroyed.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Now he did not say this of his own accord; but, as high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was to die for the nation \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}And not for the nation only, but also that he might unite in one body the children of God now scattered far and wide.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}So from that day they plotted to put Jesus to death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}In consequence of this, Jesus did not go about publicly among the people any more, but left and went into the country bordering on the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, where he stayed with his disciples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}But the Jewish Festival of the Passover was near; and many people had gone up from the country to Jerusalem, for their purification, before the Festival began.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}So they looked for Jesus there, and said to one another, as they stood in the Temple Courts, \uc1\u8216*What do you think? Do you think he will come to the Festival?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}The chief priests and the Pharisees had already issued orders that, if anyone learned where Jesus was, he should give information, so that they might arrest him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Last Days

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Six days before the Passover Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead, was living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There a supper was given in his honour at which Martha waited, while Lazarus was one of those present at the table.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Mary took a pound of choice spikenard perfume of great value, and anointed the feet of Jesus with it, and then wiped them with her hair. The whole house was filled with the scent of the perfume.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}One of the disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was about to betray Jesus, asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Why was not this perfume sold for a year\uc1\u8217*s wages, and the money given to poor people?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and, being in charge of the purse, used to take what was put in it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*Leave her alone,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*so that she may keep it until the day when my body is being prepared for burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The poor you always have with you, but you will not always have me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now great numbers of people found out that Jesus was at Bethany; and they came there, not only because of him, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The chief priests, however, plotted to put Lazarus, as well as Jesus, to death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}because it was owing to him that many of the people had left them, and were becoming believers in Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On the following day great numbers of people who had come to the Festival, hearing that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem, took palm branches,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and went out to meet him, shouting as they went, \uc1\u8216*God save him! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord \uc1\u8211* the king of Israel!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Having found a young donkey, Jesus seated himself on it, in accordance with the passage of scripture \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*Fear not, people of Zion. Your king is coming to you, sitting on the foal of a donkey.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}His disciples did not understand all this at first; but, when Jesus had been exalted, then they remembered that these things had been said of him in scripture, and that they had done these things for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Meanwhile the people who were with him, when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead, were telling what they had seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This, indeed, was why the crowd met him \uc1\u8211* because people had heard that he had given this sign of his mission.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So the Pharisees said to one another, \uc1\u8216*You see that you are gaining nothing! Why, all the world has run after him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Among those who were going up to worship at the Festival were some Greeks,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}who went to Philip of Bethsaida in Galilee, and said, \uc1\u8216*Sir, we wish to see Jesus.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Philip went and told Andrew, and then together they went and told Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}This was his reply \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The time has come for the Son of Man to be exalted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}In truth I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains solitary; but, if it dies, it becomes fruitful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}A person who loves their life loses it; while someone who hates their life in the present world will preserve it for eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}If someone is ready to serve me, let them follow me; and where I am, there my servant will be also. If a person is ready to serve me, my Father will honour them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Now I am distressed at heart and what can I say? Father, bring me safe through this hour \uc1\u8211* yet it was for this reason that I came to this hour \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Father, honour your own name.\uc1\u8217* At this there came a voice from heaven, which said, \uc1\u8216*I have already honoured it, and I will honour it again.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The crowd of bystanders, who heard the sound, said that it was thundering. Others said, \uc1\u8216*An angel has been speaking to him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*It was not for my sake that the voice came,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but for yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Now this world is on its trial. Now the Spirit that is ruling this world will be driven out;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}By these words he indicated what death he was destined to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*We,\uc1\u8217* replied the people, \uc1\u8216*have learned from the Law that the Christ is to remain for ever; how is it, then, that you say that the Son of Man must be \uc1\u8220*lifted up\uc1\u8221* Who is this \uc1\u8220*Son of Man\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Only a little while longer,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*will you have the light among you. Travel on while you have the light, so that darkness may not overtake you; he who travels in the darkness does not know where he is going.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}While you still have the light, believe in the light, so that you may be children of light.\uc1\u8217* After he had said this, Jesus went away, and hid himself from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But, though Jesus had given so many signs of his mission before their eyes, they still did not believe in him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}in fulfilment of the words of the prophet Isaiah, where he says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Lord, who has believed our teaching? And to whom has the might of the Lord been revealed?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}The reason why they were unable to believe is given by Isaiah elsewhere, in these words \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8220*He has blinded their eyes, and blunted their mind, so that they should not see with their eyes, and perceive with their mind, and turn \uc1\u8211* And I should heal them.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Isaiah said this, because he saw Christ\uc1\u8217*s glory; and it was of him that he spoke.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Yet for all this, even among the leading men there were many who came to believe in Jesus; but, because of the Pharisees, they did not acknowledge it, because they were afraid that they should be expelled from their synagogues;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}for they valued honour from people more than honour from God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}But Jesus had proclaimed, \uc1\u8216*He who believes in me believes, not in me, but in him who sent me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}and he who sees me sees him who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}I have come as a light into the world, so that no one who believes in me should remain in the darkness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}When anyone hears my teaching and pays no heed to it, I am not his judge; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}He who rejects me, and disregards my teaching, has a judge already \uc1\u8211* the message which I have delivered will itself be his judge at the Last day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}For I have not delivered it on my own authority; but the Father, who sent me, has himself given me his command as to what I should say, and what message I should deliver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}And I know that eternal life lies in keeping his command. Therefore, whatever I say, I say only what the Father has taught me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Before the Passover Festival began, Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave the world and go to the Father. He had loved those who were his own in the world, and he loved them to the last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The devil had already put the thought of betraying Jesus into the mind of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and at supper, Jesus \uc1\u8211* although knowing that the Father had put everything into his hands, and that he had come from God, and was to return to God \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}rose from his place, and, taking off his upper garments, tied a towel round his waist.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He then poured some water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples\uc1\u8217* feet, and to wipe them with the towel which was tied round him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When he came to Simon Peter, Peter said, \uc1\u8216*You, Master! Are you going to wash my feet?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*You do not understand now what I am doing,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but you will learn by and by.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*You will never wash my feet!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Peter. \uc1\u8216*Unless I wash you,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*you have nothing in common with me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Then, Master, not my feet only,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Simon Peter, \uc1\u8216*but also my hands and my head.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*He who has bathed,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*has no need to wash, unless it be his feet, but is altogether clean; and you,\uc1\u8217* he said to the disciples, \uc1\u8216*are clean, yet not all of you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said \uc1\u8220*You are not all clean.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When he had washed their feet, and had put on his upper garments and taken his place, he spoke to them again. \uc1\u8216*Do you understand what I have been doing to you?\uc1\u8217* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*You yourselves call me \uc1\u8220*the teacher\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*the Master\uc1\u8221*, and you are right, for I am both.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If I, then \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*the Master\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*the teacher\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another\uc1\u8217*s feet;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for I have given you an example, so that you may do just as I have done to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In truth I tell you, a servant is not greater than their master, neither is a messenger greater than the one who sends them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Now that you know these things, happy are you if you do them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I am not speaking about all of you. I know whom I have chosen; but this is in fulfilment of the words of scripture \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*He that is eating my bread has lifted his heel against me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For the future I will tell you of things before they take place, so that, when they take place, you may believe that I am what I am.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In truth I tell you, the one who receives anyone that I send receives me; and the person who receives me receives him who sent me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}After saying this, Jesus was much troubled, and said solemnly, \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you that it is one of you who will betray me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The disciples looked at one another, wondering whom he meant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Next to Jesus, in the place on his right hand, was one of his disciples, whom he loved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So Simon Peter made signs to that disciple, and whispered, \uc1\u8216*Tell me who it is that he means.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Being in this position, that disciple leant back on Jesus\uc1\u8217* shoulder, and asked him, \uc1\u8216*Who is it, Master?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8216*It is the one,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*to whom I will give a piece of bread after dipping it in the dish.\uc1\u8217* And, when Jesus had dipped the bread, he took it and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and it was then, after he had received it, that Satan took possession of him. So Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do at once what you are going to do.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But no one at the table understood why he said this to Judas.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Some thought that, as Judas kept the purse, Jesus meant that he was to buy some things needed for the Festival, or to give something to the poor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}After taking the piece of bread, Judas went out immediately; and it was night.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When Judas had gone out, Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*Now the Son of Man has been exalted, and God has been exalted through him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and God will exalt him with himself \uc1\u8211* yes, he will exalt him forthwith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}My children, I am to be with you but a little while longer. You will look for me; and what I said to the people \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You cannot come where I am going\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* I now say to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}I give you a new commandment \uc1\u8211* love one another; love one another as I have loved you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}It is by this that everyone will recognise you as my disciples \uc1\u8211* by your loving one another.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*Where are you going, Master?\uc1\u8217* asked Peter. \uc1\u8216*I am going where you cannot now follow me,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but you will follow me later.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*Why cannot I follow you now, Master?\uc1\u8217* asked Peter. \uc1\u8216*I will lay down my life for you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Will you lay down your life for me?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus. \uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you, the cock will not crow until you have disowned me three times.{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Do not let your hearts be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}In my Father\uc1\u8217*s home there are many dwellings. If it had not been so, I should have told you, for I am going to prepare a place for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, since I go and prepare a place for you, I will return and take you to be with me, so that you may be where I am;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and you know the way to the place where I am going.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*We do not know where you are going, Master,\uc1\u8217* said Thomas. \uc1\u8216*So how can we know the way?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no one ever comes to the Father except through me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If you had recognised me, you would have known my Father also; for the future you will recognise him, indeed you have already seen him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Master, show us the Father,\uc1\u8217* said Philip, \uc1\u8216*and we will be satisfied.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}\uc1\u8216*Have I been all this time among you,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus, \uc1\u8216*and yet you, Philip, have not recognised me? The person who has seen me has seen the Father, how can you say, then, \uc1\u8220*Show us the Father\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Don\uc1\u8217*t you believe that I am in union with the Father, and the Father with me? In giving you my teaching I am not speaking on my own authority; but the Father himself, always in union with me, does his own work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Believe me,\uc1\u8217* he said to them all, \uc1\u8216*when I say that I am in union with the Father and the Father with me, or else believe me because of the work itself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In truth I tell you, the person who believes in me will themselves do the work that I am doing; and they will do greater work still, because I am going to the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Whatever you ask, in my name, I will do, so that the Father may be honoured in the Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If you ask anything, in my name, I will do it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If you love me, you will lay my commands to heart,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and I will ask the Father, and he will give you another helper, to be with you always \uc1\u8211* the Spirit of truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The world cannot receive this Spirit, because it does not see him or recognise him, but you recognise him, because he is always with you, and is within you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I will not leave you bereaved; I will come to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will still see me; because I am living, you will be living also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}At that time you will recognise that I am in union with the Father, and you with me, and I with you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It is they who have my commands and lays them to heart who loves me; and the person who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love them, and will reveal myself to them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*What has happened, Master,\uc1\u8217* said Judas (not Judas Iscariot), \uc1\u8216*that you are going to reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*Whoever loves me,\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered, \uc1\u8216*will lay my message to heart; and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The person who does not love me will not lay my message to heart; and the message to which you are listening is not my own, but comes from the Father who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I have told you all this while still with you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}but the helper \uc1\u8211* the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my name \uc1\u8211* will teach you all things, and will recall to your minds all that I have said to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Peace be with you! My own peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled, or dismayed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You heard me say that I was going away and would return to you. Had you loved me, you would have been glad that I was going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And this I have told you now before it happens, so that, when it does happen, you may still believe in me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I will not talk with you much more, for the Spirit that is ruling the world is coming. He has nothing in common with me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}but he is coming so that the world may see that I love the Father, and that I do as the Father commanded me. Come, let us be going.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}\uc1\u8216*I am the true vine, and my Father is the vine-grower.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Any unfruitful branch in me he takes away, and he cleanses every fruitful branch, so that it may bear more fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You are already clean because of the message that I have given you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Remain united to me, and I will remain united to you. As a branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it remains united to the vine; no more can you, unless you remain united to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I am the vine, you are the branches. If you remains united to me, while I remain united to you \uc1\u8211* you bear fruit plentifully; for you can do nothing apart from me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}If anyone does not remain united to me, they are thrown away, as a branch would be, and withers up. Such branches are collected and thrown into the fire, and are burnt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If you remain united to me, and my teaching remains in your hearts, ask whatever you wish, and it will be yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It is by your bearing fruit plentifully, and so showing yourselves my disciples, that my Father is honoured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; remain in my love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If you lay my commands to heart, you will remain in my love; just as I have laid the Father\uc1\u8217*s commands to heart and remain in his love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I have told you all this so that my own joy may be yours, and that your joy may be complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This is my command \uc1\u8211* love one another, as I have loved you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No one can give greater proof of love than by laying down their life for their friends.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And you are my friends, if you do what I command you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I no longer call you \uc1\u8220*servants,\uc1\u8221* because a servant does not know what their master is doing; but I have given you the name of \uc1\u8220*friends,\uc1\u8221* because I made known to you everything that I learned from my Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}It wasn\uc1\u8217*t you who chose me, but I who chose you, and I appointed you to go and bear fruit \uc1\u8211* fruit that should remain, so that the Father might grant you whatever you ask in my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I am giving you these commands that you may love one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If the world hates you, you know that it has first hated me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}If you belonged to the world, the world would love its own. Because you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world \uc1\u8211* that is why the world hates you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Remember what I said to you \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*A servant is not greater than their master.\uc1\u8221* If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have laid my message to heart, they will lay yours to heart also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But they will do all this to you, because you believe in my name, for they do not know him who sent me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have had no sin to answer for; but as it is, they have no excuse for their sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The person who hates me hates my Father also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}If I had not done among them such work as no one else ever did, they would have had no sin to answer for; but, as it is, they have both seen and hated both me and my Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And so is fulfilled what is said in their Law \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They hated me without cause.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But, when the helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father \uc1\u8211* the Spirit of truth, who comes from the Father \uc1\u8211* will bear testimony to me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}yes, and you also are to bear testimony, because you have been with me from the first.{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}\uc1\u8216*I have spoken to you in this way so that you may not falter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}They will expel you from their synagogues; indeed the time is coming when anyone who kills you will think that they are making an offering to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They will do this, because they have not learned to know the Father, or even me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But I have spoken to you of these things so that, when the time for them comes, you may remember that I told you about them myself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I did not tell you all this at first, because I was with you. But now I am to return to him who sent me; and yet not one of you asks me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Where are you going?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Although your hearts are full of sorrow at all that I have been saying to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Yet I am only telling you the truth; it is for your good that I should go away. For otherwise the helper will never come to you, but, if I leave you, I will send him to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And he, when he comes, will bring conviction to the world as to sin, and as to righteousness, and as to judgment;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}as to sin, for people do not believe in me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}as to righteousness, for I am going to the Father, and you will see me no longer;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}as to judgment, for the Spirit that is ruling this world has been condemned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I have still much to say to you, but you cannot bear it now.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Yet when he \uc1\u8211* The Spirit of truth \uc1\u8211* comes, he will guide you into all truth; for he will not speak on his own authority, but he will speak of all that he hears; and he will tell you of the things that are to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He will honour me; because he will take of what is mine, and will tell it to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Everything that the Father has is mine; that is why I said that he takes of what is mine, and will tell it to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In a little while you will no longer see me; and then in a little while you will see me indeed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At this some of his disciples said to one another, \uc1\u8216*What does he mean by saying to us \uc1\u8220*In a little while you will not see me, and then in a little while you will see me indeed\uc1\u8221*; and by saying \uc1\u8220*Because I am going to the Father\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}What does he mean by \uc1\u8220*In a little while\uc1\u8221*?\uc1\u8217* they said. \uc1\u8216*We do not know what he is speaking about.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus saw that they were wanting to ask him a question, and said, \uc1\u8216*Are you trying to find out from one another what I meant by saying \uc1\u8220*In a little while you will not see me; and then in a little while you will see me indeed\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}In truth I tell you that you will weep and mourn, but the world will rejoice; you will suffer pain, but your pain will turn to joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}A woman in labour is in pain because her time has come; but no sooner is the child born, than she forgets her trouble in her joy that a child has been born into the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}You, in the same way, are sorry now; but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will rob you of your joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And at that time you will not ask me anything; in truth I tell you, if you ask the Father for anything, he will grant it to you in my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So far you have not asked for anything, in my name; ask, and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I have spoken to you of all this in figures; a time is coming, however, when I will not speak any longer to you in figures, but will tell you about the Father plainly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}You will ask, at that time, in my name; and I do not say that I will intercede with the Father for you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came from the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I came out from the Father, and have come into the world; and now I am to leave the world, and go to the Father.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*At last,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed the disciples, \uc1\u8216*you are using plain words and not speaking in figures at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Now we are sure that you know everything, and need not wait for anyone to question you. This makes us believe that you did come from God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Do you believe that already?\uc1\u8217* Jesus answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8216*Listen! A time is coming \uc1\u8211* indeed it has already come \uc1\u8211* when you are to be scattered, each going his own way, and to leave me alone; and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I have spoken to you in this way, so that in me you may find peace. In the world you will find trouble; yet, take courage! I have conquered the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}After saying this, Jesus raised his eyes heavenwards, and said:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Father, the hour has come; honour your Son, so that your Son may honour you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}even as you gave him power over all humanity, so that he should give eternal life to everyone you have given him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And the eternal life is this \uc1\u8211* to know you the one true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I have honoured you on earth by completing the work which you have given me to do;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and now do you honour me, Father, at your own side, with the honour which I had at your side before the world began.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I have revealed you to those whom you gave me from the world; they were your own, and you gave them to me; and they have laid your message to heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They recognise now that everything that you gave me was from you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for I have given them the teaching which you gave me, and they received it, and clearly understood that I came from you, and they believed that you have sent me as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I intercede for them; I am not interceding for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are your own \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}All that is mine is yours, and all that is yours is mine \uc1\u8211* and I am honoured in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now I am to be in this world no longer, but they are still to be in the world, and I am to come to you. Holy Father, keep them by that revelation of your name which you have given me, so that they may be one, as we are.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}While I was with them, I kept them by that revelation, and I have guarded them; and not one of them has been lost, except that lost soul \uc1\u8211* in fulfilment of scripture.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But now I am to come to you; and I am speaking like this, while still in the world, so that they may have my own joy, in all its fullness, in their hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I have given them your message; and the world hated them, because they do not belong to the world, even as I do not belong to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I do not ask you to take them out of the world, but to keep them from evil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They do not belong to the world, even as I do not belong to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Consecrate them by the truth; your message is truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Just as you have sent me as your messenger to the world, so I send them as my messengers to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And it is for their sakes that I am consecrating myself, so that they also may be truly consecrated.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But it is not only for them that I am interceding, but also for those who believe in me through their message,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}that they all may be one \uc1\u8211* that as you, Father, are in union with us \uc1\u8211* and so the world may believe that you have sent me as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I have given them the honour which you have given me, so that they may be one as we are one \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}I in union with them and you with me \uc1\u8211* so that they may be perfected in their union, and so that the world may know that you have sent me as your messenger, and that you have loved them as you have loved me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Father, my desire for all those whom you have given me is that they may be with me where I am, so that they may see the honour which you have given me; for you did love me before the beginning of the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Righteous Father, though the world did not know you, I knew you; and these people knew that you have sent me as your messenger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I have made you known to them, and will do so still; that the love that you have had for me may be in their hearts, and that I may be in them also.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}When Jesus had said this, he went out with his disciples and crossed the Kidron ravine to a place where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples went.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The place was well known to Judas, the betrayer, for Jesus and his disciples had often met there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So Judas, who had obtained the soldiers of the Roman garrison, and some guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Jesus, aware of all that was coming upon him, went to meet them, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*For whom are you looking?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Jesus of Nazareth,\uc1\u8217* was their answer. \uc1\u8216*I am he,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. (Judas, the betrayer, was also standing with them.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When Jesus said \uc1\u8220*I am he,\uc1\u8221* they drew back and fell to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he again asked for whom they were looking, and they answered, \uc1\u8216*Jesus of Nazareth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*I have already told you that I am he,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*so, if it is for me that you are looking, let these people go.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This was in fulfilment of his words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Of those whom you have given me I have not lost one.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}At this, Simon Peter, who had a sword with him, drew it, and struck the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant\uc1\u8217*s name was Malchus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But Jesus said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*Sheathe your sword. Should I not drink the cup which the Father has given me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So the soldiers of the garrison, with their commanding officer and the Jewish guards, arrested Jesus and bound him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and took him first of all to Annas. Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was Caiaphas who had counselled the religious authorities, that it was best that one person should die for the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Meanwhile Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. That disciple, being well-known to the high priest, went with Jesus into the high priest\uc1\u8217*s courtyard,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}while Peter stood outside by the door. Presently the other disciple \uc1\u8211* the one well-known to the high priest \uc1\u8211* went out and spoke to the portress, and brought Peter in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So the maidservant said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you also one of this man\uc1\u8217*s disciples?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No, I am not,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The servants and guards were standing round a charcoal fire (which they had made because it was cold), and were warming themselves. Peter, too, was with them, standing and warming himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*For my part,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*I have spoken to all the world openly. I always taught in some synagogue, or in the Temple Courts, places where everyone assembles, and I never spoke of anything in secret.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Why question me? Question those who have listened to me as to what I have spoken about to them. They must know what I said.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}When Jesus said this, one of the guards, who was standing near, gave him a blow with his hand. \uc1\u8216*Do you answer the high priest like that?\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}\uc1\u8216*If I said anything wrong, give evidence about it,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*but if not, why do you strike me?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile Simon Peter was standing there, warming himself; so they said to him, \uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you also one of his disciples?\uc1\u8217* Peter denied it. \uc1\u8216*No, I am not,\uc1\u8217* he said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}One of the high priest\uc1\u8217*s servants, a relation of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Didn\uc1\u8217*t I myself see you with him in the garden?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Peter again denied it; and at that moment a cock crowed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}From Caiaphas they took Jesus to the Government house. It was early in the morning. But they did not enter the Government house themselves, otherwise they might become defiled, and so be unable to eat the Passover.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Therefore Pilate came outside to speak to them. \uc1\u8216*What charge do you bring against this man?\uc1\u8217* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*If he had not been a criminal, we should not have given him up to you,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Take him yourselves,\uc1\u8217* said Pilate, \uc1\u8216*and try him by your own Law.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We have no power to put anyone to death,\uc1\u8217* the authorities replied \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}in fulfilment of what Jesus had said when indicating the death that he was destined to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}After that, Pilate went into the Government house again, and calling Jesus up, asked him, \uc1\u8216*Are you the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Do you ask me that yourself?\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*or did others say it to you about me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*Do you take me for a Jew?\uc1\u8217* was Pilate\uc1\u8217*s answer. \uc1\u8216*It is your own nation and the chief priests who have given you up to me. What have you done?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}\uc1\u8216*My kingly power,\uc1\u8217* replied Jesus, \uc1\u8216*is not due to this world. If it had been so, my servants would be doing their utmost to prevent my being given up to the authorities; but my kingly power is not from the world.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8216*So you are a king after all!\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Pilate. \uc1\u8216*Yes, it is true I am a king,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus. \uc1\u8216*I was born for this, I have come into the world for this \uc1\u8211* to bear testimony to the truth. Everyone who is on the side of truth listens to my voice.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*What is truth?\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Pilate. After saying this, he went out to the crowd again, and said, \uc1\u8216*For my part, I find nothing with which he can be charged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}It is, however, the custom for me to grant you the release of one man at the Passover Festival. Do you wish for the release of the king of the Jews?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}\uc1\u8216*No, not this man,\uc1\u8217* they shouted again, \uc1\u8216*but Barabbas!\uc1\u8217* This Barabbas was a robber.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}After that, Pilate had Jesus scourged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The soldiers made a crown with some thorns and put it on his head and threw a purple robe round him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They kept coming up to him and saying, \uc1\u8216*Long live the king of the Jews!\uc1\u8217* and they gave him blow after blow with their hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Pilate again came outside, and said to the people, \uc1\u8216*Look! I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find nothing with which he can be charged.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe; and Pilate said to them, \uc1\u8216*Here is the man!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}When the chief priests and the guards saw him, they shouted, \uc1\u8216*Crucify him! Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Take him yourselves and crucify him,\uc1\u8217* said Pilate. \uc1\u8216*For my part, I find nothing with which he can be charged.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*But we,\uc1\u8217* replied the crowd, \uc1\u8216*have a Law, under which he deserves death for making himself out to be the Son of God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Pilate heard what they said, he became still more alarmed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and, going into the Government house again, he said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Where do you come from?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Jesus made no reply. So Pilate said to him, \uc1\u8216*Do you refuse to speak to me? Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that I have power to release you, and have power to crucify you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*You would have no power over me at all,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*if it had not been given you from above; and, therefore, the man who betrayed me to you is guilty of the greater sin.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}This made Pilate anxious to release him; but the crowd shouted, \uc1\u8216*If you release that man, you are no friend of the Emperor! Anyone who makes himself out to be a king is setting himself against the Emperor!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On hearing what they said, Pilate brought Jesus out, and took his seat on the Bench at a place called \uc1\u8220*The Stone Pavement\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* in Hebrew \uc1\u8220*Gabbatha.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It was the Passover Preparation day, and about noon. Then he said to the crowd, \uc1\u8216*Here is your king!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}At that the people shouted, \uc1\u8216*Kill him! Kill him! Crucify him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*What! Should I crucify your king?\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Pilate. \uc1\u8216*We have no king but the Emperor,\uc1\u8217* replied the chief priests;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}so Pilate gave Jesus up to them to be crucified.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 So they took Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and he went out, carrying his cross himself, to the place which is named from a skull, or, in Hebrew, Golgotha.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}There they crucified him, and two others with him \uc1\u8211* one on each side, and Jesus between them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Pilate also had these words written and put up over the cross \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}These words were read by many people, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and they were written in Hebrew, Latin and Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The chief priests said to Pilate, \uc1\u8216*Do not write \uc1\u8220*The king of the Jews\uc1\u8221*, but write what the man said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I am the king of the Jews.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But Pilate answered, \uc1\u8216*What I have written, I have written.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and divided them into four shares \uc1\u8211* a share for each soldier \uc1\u8211* and they took the coat also. The coat had no seam, being woven in one piece from top to bottom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}So they said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Do not let us tear it, but let us cast lots for it, to see who will have it.\uc1\u8217* This was in fulfilment of the words of scripture \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*They shared my clothes among them,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and over my clothing they cast lots.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 That was what the soldiers did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Meanwhile near the cross of Jesus were standing his mother and his mother\uc1\u8217*s sister, as well as Mary the wife of Clopas and Mary of Magdala.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved, standing near, he said to his mother, \uc1\u8216*There is your son.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then he said to that disciple, \uc1\u8216*There is your mother.\uc1\u8217* And from that very hour the disciple took her to live in his house.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Afterwards, knowing that everything was now finished, Jesus said, in fulfilment of the words of scripture, \uc1\u8216*I am thirsty.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}There was a bowl standing there full of common wine; so they put a sponge soaked in the wine on the end of a hyssop-stalk, and held it up to his mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}When Jesus had received the wine, he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*All is finished!\uc1\u8217* Then, bowing his head, he resigned his spirit to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}It was the Preparation day, and so, to prevent the bodies from remaining on the crosses during the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies removed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Accordingly the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man, and then those of the other who had been crucified with Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}but, on coming to him, when they saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}One of the soldiers, however, pierced his side with a spear, and blood and water immediately flowed from it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}This is the statement of one who actually saw it \uc1\u8211* and his statement may be relied on, and he knows that he is speaking the truth \uc1\u8211* and it is given in order that you also may be convinced.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For all this happened in fulfilment of the words of scripture \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Not one of its bones will be broken.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And there is another passage which says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They will look on him whom they pierced.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}After this, Joseph of Arimathea, a disciple of Jesus \uc1\u8211* but a secret one, owing to his fear of the religious authorities \uc1\u8211* begged Pilate\uc1\u8217*s permission to remove the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him leave; so Joseph went and removed the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Nicodemus, too \uc1\u8211* the man who had formerly visited Jesus by night \uc1\u8211* came with a roll of myrrh and aloes, weighing nearly a hundred pounds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}They took the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen with the spices, according to the Jewish mode of burial.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}At the place where Jesus had been crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a newly made tomb in which no one had ever been laid.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}And so, because of its being the Preparation day, and as the tomb was close at hand, they laid Jesus there.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Risen Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}On the first day of the week, early in the morning, while it was still dark, Mary of Magdala went to the tomb, and saw that the stone had been removed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}So she came running to Simon Peter, and to that other disciple who was Jesus\uc1\u8217* friend, and said to them, \uc1\u8216*They have taken away the Master out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So, Peter started off with that other disciple, and they went to the tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The two began running together; but the other disciple ran faster than Peter, and reached the tomb first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Stooping down, he saw the linen wrappings lying there, but did not go in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Presently Simon Peter came following behind him, and went into the tomb; and he looked at the linen wrappings lying there,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and the cloth which had been on Jesus\uc1\u8217* head, not lying with the wrappings, but rolled up on one side, separately.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, went inside too, and he saw for himself and was convinced.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For they did not then understand the passage of scripture which says that Jesus must rise again from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The disciples then returned to their companions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Meanwhile Mary was standing close outside the tomb, weeping. Still weeping, she leant forward into the tomb,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and perceived two angels clothed in white sitting there, where the body of Jesus had been lying, one where the head and the other where the feet had been.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Why are you weeping?\uc1\u8217* asked the angels. \uc1\u8216*They have taken my Master away,\uc1\u8217* she answered, \uc1\u8216*and I do not know where they have laid him.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}After saying this, she turned round, and looked at Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*Why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?\uc1\u8217* he asked. Supposing him to be the gardener, Mary answered, \uc1\u8216*If it was you, Sir, who carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away myself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Mary!\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. She turned round, and exclaimed in Hebrew, \uc1\u8216*Rabboni!\uc1\u8217* (or, as we should say, \uc1\u8220*teacher\uc1\u8221*).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8216*Do not hold me,\uc1\u8217* Jesus said, \uc1\u8216*for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers, and tell them that I am ascending to him who is my Father and their Father, my God and their God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Mary of Magdala went and told the disciples that she had seen the Master, and that he had said this to her.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In the evening of the same day \uc1\u8211* the first day of the week \uc1\u8211* after the doors of the room, in which the disciples were, had been shut because they were afraid of the religious authorities, Jesus came and stood among them and said, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}after which he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples were filled with joy when they saw the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Again Jesus said to them, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me as his messenger, so I am sending you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After saying this, he breathed on them, and said, \uc1\u8216*Receive the Holy Spirit;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}if you remit anyone\uc1\u8217*s sins, they have been remitted; and, if you retain them, they have been retained.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But Thomas, one of the Twelve, called \uc1\u8220*The Twin,\uc1\u8221* was not with them when Jesus came;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}so the rest of the disciples said to him, \uc1\u8216*We have seen the Master!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Unless I see the marks of the nails in his hands,\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*and put my finger into the marks, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}A week later the disciples were again in the house, and Thomas was with them. After the doors had been shut, Jesus came and stood among them, and said, \uc1\u8216*Peace be with you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Then he said to Thomas, \uc1\u8216*Place your finger here, and look at my hands; and place your hand here, and put it into my side; and do not refuse to believe, but believe.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And Thomas exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*My Master, and my God!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Is it because you have seen me that you have believed?\uc1\u8217* said Jesus. \uc1\u8216*Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}There were many other signs of his mission that Jesus gave in presence of the disciples, which are not recorded in this book;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}but these have been recorded so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God \uc1\u8211* and that, through your belief in his name, you may have life.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}Later on, Jesus showed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It was in this way, \uc1\u8211* Simon Peter, Thomas, who was called \uc1\u8220*The Twin,\uc1\u8221* Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, Zebedee\uc1\u8217*s sons, and two other disciples of Jesus, were together, when Simon Peter said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I am going fishing.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*We will come with you,\uc1\u8217* said the others. They went out and got into the boat, but caught nothing that night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Just as day was breaking, Jesus came and stood on the beach; but the disciples did not know that it was he.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*My children,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*have you anything to eat?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* they answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Cast your net to the right of the boat,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and you will find fish.\uc1\u8217* So they cast the net, and now they could not haul it in because of the quantity of fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, \uc1\u8216*It is the Master!\uc1\u8217* When Simon Peter heard that it was the Master, he fastened his coat round him (for he had taken it off), and threw himself into the sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But the rest of the disciples came in the boat (for they were only about a hundred yards from shore), dragging the net full of fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When they had come ashore, they found a charcoal fire ready, with some fish already on it, and some bread as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*Bring some of the fish which you have just caught,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So Simon Peter got into the boat and hauled the net ashore full of large fish, a hundred and fifty-three of them; and yet, although there were so many, the net had not been torn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*Come and have breakfast.\uc1\u8217*, Jesus said. None of the disciples dared ask him who he was, because they knew it was the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Jesus went and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish too.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This was the third time that Jesus showed himself to the disciples after he had risen from the dead.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}When breakfast was over, Jesus said to Simon Peter, \uc1\u8216*Simon, son of John, do you love me more than the others?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*you know that I am your friend.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Feed my lambs,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then, a second time, Jesus asked, \uc1\u8216*Simon, son of John, do you love me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes, Master,\uc1\u8217* he answered, \uc1\u8216*you know that I am your friend.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Tend my sheep,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The third time, Jesus said to him, \uc1\u8216*Simon, son of John, are you my friend?\uc1\u8217* Peter was hurt at his third question being \uc1\u8220*Are you my friend?\uc1\u8221*; and exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Master, you know everything! You can tell that I am your friend.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Feed my sheep,\uc1\u8217* said Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*In truth I tell you,\uc1\u8217* he continued, \uc1\u8216*when you were young, you used to put on your own clothes, and walk wherever you wished; but, when you have grown old, you will have to stretch out your hands, while someone else puts on your clothes, and takes you where you do not wish.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Jesus said this to show the death by which Peter was to honour God, and then he added, \uc1\u8216*Follow me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Peter turned round, and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following \uc1\u8211* the one who at the supper leant back on the Master\uc1\u8217*s shoulder, and asked him who it was who would betray him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, \uc1\u8216*Master, what about this man?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*If it is my will that he should wait until I come,\uc1\u8217* answered Jesus, \uc1\u8216*what has that to do with you? Follow me yourself.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So the report spread among his followers that that disciple was not to die; yet Jesus did not say that he was not to die, but said \uc1\u8216*If it is my will that he should wait until I come, what has that to do with you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}It is this disciple who states these things, and who recorded them; and we know that his statement is true.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}There are many other things which Jesus did; but, if every one of them were to be recorded in detail, I suppose that even the world itself would not hold the books that would be written.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Acts (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Acts

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 of the Apostles

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 The Church and the Jews

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Acts of the Apostles Peter and John

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The first account which I drew up, Theophilus, dealt with all that Jesus did and taught from the very first,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}down to that day on which he was taken up to heaven, after he had, by the help of the Holy Spirit, given instructions to the apostles whom he had chosen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}With abundant proofs, he showed himself to them, still living, after his death; appearing to them from time to time during forty days, and speaking of all that related to the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And once, when he had gathered them together, he charged them not to leave Jerusalem, but to wait there for the fulfilment of the Father\uc1\u8217*s promise \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*that promise,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*of which you have heard me speak;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for, while John baptized with water, you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit before many days have passed.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}So, when the apostles had met together, they asked Jesus this question \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Master, is this the time when you intend to re-establish the kingdom for Israel?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}His answer was, \uc1\u8216*It is not for you to know times or hours, for the Father has reserved these for his own decision;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}but you will receive power, when the Holy Spirit will have descended on you, and will be witnesses for me not only in Jerusalem, but throughout Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}No sooner had Jesus said this than he was caught up before their eyes, and a cloud received him from their sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}While they were still gazing up into the heavens, as he went, suddenly two men, clothed in white, stood beside them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and said, \uc1\u8216*People of Galilee, why are you standing here looking up into the heavens? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into the heavens, will come in the same way in which you have seen him go into the heavens.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the hill called Olivet, which is about three quarters of a mile from the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When they reached Jerusalem, they went to the upstairs room, where they were staying. There were there Peter, John, James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They all united in devoting themselves to prayer, and so did some women, and Mary, the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}About this time, at a meeting of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, when there were about a hundred and twenty present, Peter rose to speak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Friends,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*it was necessary that the prediction of scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit made by the lips of David about Judas, who acted as guide to the men who arrested Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for he was one of our number and had his part allotted him in this work of ours.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}(This man had bought a piece of land with the price of his treachery; and, falling heavily, his body had burst open, and all his bowels protruded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This became known to everyone living in Jerusalem, so that the field came to be called, in their language, \uc1\u8220*Akeldama,\uc1\u8221* which means the \uc1\u8220*Field of Blood.\uc1\u8221*)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*For in the book of Psalms,\uc1\u8217* Peter continued, \uc1\u8216*it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Let his home become desolate,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and let no one live in it\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 and also \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*His office let another take.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore, from among the men who have been with us all the time that Jesus, our Master, went in and out among us \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}from his baptism by John down to that day on which he was taken from us \uc1\u8211* someone must be found to join us as a witness of his resurrection.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So they put forward two men, Joseph called Barsabbas, whose other name was Justus, and Matthias;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and they offered this prayer \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Lord, who reads all hearts, show which of these two men you have chosen{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}to take the place in this apostolic work, which Judas has abandoned, to go to his proper place.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then they drew lots between them; and, the lot having fallen to Matthias, he was added to the number of the eleven apostles.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}In the course of the Festival at the close of the Harvest the disciples had all met together,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}when suddenly there came from the heavens a noise like a strong wind rushing by; it filled the whole house in which they were sitting.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then there appeared tongues of what seemed to be flame, separating, so that one settled on each of them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak in different languages as the Spirit prompted their utterances.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now there were then staying in Jerusalem religious Jews from every country in the world;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, when this sound was heard, numbers of people collected, in the greatest excitement, because each of them heard the disciples speaking in his own language.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They were utterly amazed, and kept asking in astonishment, \uc1\u8216*What! Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then how is it that we each of us hear them in our own language?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Some of us are Parthians, some Medes, some Elamites; and some of us live in Mesopotamia, in Judea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Roman Asia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}in Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the districts of Libya adjoining Cyrene; some of us are visitors from Rome,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}either Jews by birth or converts, and some are Cretans and Arabians \uc1\u8211* yet we all alike hear them speaking in our own languages of the great things that God has done.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They were all utterly amazed and bewildered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*What does it mean?\uc1\u8217* they asked one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But there were some who said with a sneer, \uc1\u8216*They have had too much new wine.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Peter, surrounded by the eleven other apostles, stood up, and, raising his voice, addressed the crowd. \uc1\u8216*People of Judea,\uc1\u8217* he began, \uc1\u8216*and all you who are staying in Jerusalem, let me tell you what this means. Mark well my words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}These people are not drunk, as you suppose; for it is only now nine in the morning! No!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This is what is spoken of in the prophet Joel \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*It will come about in the last days,\uc1\u8221* God says,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*That I will pour out my Spirit on all humanity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your sons and your daughters will become prophets,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 your young men will see visions,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and your old men dream dreams;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}yes, even on the slaves \uc1\u8211* for they are mine \uc1\u8211* both men and women,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 I will in those days pour out my Spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and they will become prophets;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and I will show wonders in the heavens above,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and signs on the earth below \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 blood and fire and mist of smoke;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}the sun will become darkness,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the moon blood-red,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before the day of the Lord comes \uc1\u8211* that great and awful day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then will everyone who invokes the name of the Lord be saved.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}People of Israel, listen to what I am saying. Jesus of Nazareth, a man whose mission from God to you was proved by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God showed among you through him, as you know full well \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}he, I say, in accordance with God\uc1\u8217*s definite plan and with his previous knowledge, was betrayed, and you, by the hands of lawless men, nailed him to a cross and put him to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But God released him from the pangs of death and raised him to life, it being impossible for death to retain its hold on him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Indeed he was the one David was referring to when he said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I have had the Lord ever before my eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for he stands at my right hand, so that I should not be disquieted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Therefore my heart was cheered, and my tongue told its delight;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 yes, even my body, too, will rest in hope;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For you will not abandon my soul to Hades,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 nor surrender me, your holy one, to undergo corruption.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}You have shown me the path to life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 you will fill me with gladness in your presence.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Friends, I can speak to you the more confidently about the patriarch David, because he is dead and buried, and his tomb is here among us to this very day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}David, then, prophet as he was, knowing that God had solemnly sworn to him to set one of his descendants on his throne, looked into the future,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and referred to the resurrection of the Christ when he said that he had not been abandoned to Hades, nor had his body undergone corruption.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}It was this Jesus, whom God raised to life; and of that we are ourselves all witnesses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And now that he has been exalted to the right hand of God, and has received from the Father the promised gift of the Holy Spirit, he has begun to pour out that gift, as you yourselves now see and hear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}It was not David who went up into heaven; for he himself says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord said to my master, \uc1\u8216*Sit on my right hand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Until I put your enemies as a footstool under your feet.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}So let the whole nation of Israel know beyond all doubt, that God has made him both Lord and Christ \uc1\u8211* this Jesus whom you crucified.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}When the people heard this, they were conscience-smitten, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, \uc1\u8216*Friends, what can we do?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Repent,\uc1\u8217* answered Peter, \uc1\u8216*and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins; and then you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}For the promise is for you and for your children, and also for all those now far away, who may be called by the Lord our God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Peter spoke to them for a long time using many other arguments and pleaded with them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Save yourselves from the perverse spirit of this age.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}So those who accepted his teaching were baptized, and about three thousand people joined the disciples on that day alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}They devoted themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to the Common life of the church, to the breaking of the bread and to the Prayers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}A deep impression was made on everyone, and many wonders and signs were done at the hands of the apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}All who became believers in Christ held everything for the common use;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}they sold their property and their goods, and shared the proceeds among them all, according to their individual needs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Every day they devoted themselves to meeting together in the Temple Courts, and to the breaking of bread at their homes, while they partook of their food in simple-hearted gladness, praising God, and winning the goodwill of all the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}And the Lord daily added to their company those who were in the path of salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}One day, as Peter and John were going up into the Temple Courts for the three o\uc1\u8217*clock Prayers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}a man, who had been lame from his birth, was being carried by. This man used to be set down every day at the gate of the Temple called \uc1\u8220*the Beautiful Gate,\uc1\u8221* to beg of those who went in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Seeing Peter and John on the point of entering, he asked them to give him something.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Peter fixed his eyes on him, and so did John, and then Peter said, \uc1\u8216*Look at us.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The man was all attention, expecting to get something from them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but Peter added, \uc1\u8216*I have no gold or silver, but I give you what I have. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Grasping the lame man by the right hand, Peter lifted him up. Instantly the man\uc1\u8217*s feet and ankles became strong,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and, leaping up, he stood and began to walk about, and then went with them into the Temple Courts, walking, and leaping, and praising God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}All the people saw him walking about and praising God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and, when they recognised him as the man who used to sit begging at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, they were utterly astonished and amazed at what had happened to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}While the man still clung to Peter and John, the people all quickly gathered round them in the Colonnade named after Solomon, in the greatest astonishment.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}On seeing this, Peter said to the people, \uc1\u8216*People of Israel, why are you surprised at this? And why do you stare at us, as though we, by any power or piety of our own, had enabled this man to walk?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our ancestors, has done honour to his servant Jesus \uc1\u8211* him whom you gave up and disowned before Pilate, when he had decided to set him free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You, I say, disowned the holy and righteous one, and asked for the release of a murderer!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The guide to life you put to death! But God raised him from the dead \uc1\u8211* and of that we are ourselves witnesses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And it is by faith in the name of Jesus, that this man, whom you all see and know, has \uc1\u8211* by his name \uc1\u8211* been made strong. Yes, it is the faith inspired by Jesus that has made this complete cure of the man, before the eyes of you all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And yet, my friends, I know that you acted as you did from ignorance, and your rulers also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But it was in this way that God fulfilled all that he had long ago foretold, as to the sufferings of his Christ, by the lips of all the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore, repent and turn so that your sins may be wiped away; so that happier times may come from the Lord himself,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and so that he may send you, in Jesus, your long-appointed Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But heaven must be his home, until the days of the Universal Restoration, of which God has spoken by the lips of his holy prophets from the very first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Moses himself said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord your God will raise up from among yourselves a prophet, as he raised me. To him you will listen whenever he speaks to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And it will be that should anyone among the people not listen to that prophet, he will be utterly destroyed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel onwards, and all their successors who had a message to deliver, told of these days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}You yourselves are the heirs of the prophets, and heirs, too, of the covenant which God made with your ancestors, when he said to Abraham \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*In your descendants will all the nations of the earth be blessed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For you, first, God raised up his servant, and sent him to bless you, by turning each one of you from his wicked ways.\uc1\u8217*{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}While Peter and John were still speaking to the people, the chief priest, with the officer in charge at the Temple and the Sadducees, came up to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}much annoyed because they were teaching the people, and because, through Jesus, they were preaching the resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They arrested the apostles and, as it was already evening, had them placed in custody until the next day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Many, however, of those who had heard the apostles\uc1\u8217* message became believers in Christ, the number of the men alone amounting to about five thousand.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The next day, a meeting of the leaders of the people, the elders, and the teachers of the Law was held in Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There were present Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all who were of High-Priestly rank.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They had Peter and John brought before them, and questioned them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*By what power,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*Or in whose name have men like you done this thing?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then, Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said, \uc1\u8216*Leaders of the people and elders,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}since we are on our trial today for a kind act done to a helpless man, and are asked in what way the man here before you has been cured,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}let me tell you all and all the people of Israel, that it is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified and whom God raised from the dead \uc1\u8211* it is, I say, by his name that this man stands here before you lame no longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Jesus is \uc1\u8220*the stone which, scorned by you the builders, has yet become the corner stone.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And salvation is in him alone; for there is no other name in the whole world, given to people, to which we must look for our salvation.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When the Council saw how boldly Peter and John spoke, and found that they were uneducated men of humble station, they were surprised, and realised that they had been companions of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, when they looked at the man who had been healed, standing there with them, they had nothing to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So they ordered them out of court, and then began consulting together.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*What are we to do to these men?\uc1\u8217* they asked one another. \uc1\u8216*That a remarkable sign has been given through them is obvious to everyone living in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, to prevent this thing from spreading further among the people, let us warn them not to speak in this name any more to anyone whatever.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So they called the apostles in, and ordered them not to speak or teach in the name of Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But Peter and John replied, \uc1\u8216*Whether it is right, in the sight of God, to listen to you rather than to him \uc1\u8211* judge for yourselves,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for we cannot help speaking of what we have seen and heard.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}However, after further warnings, the Council set them at liberty, not seeing any safe way of punishing them, because of the people, for they were all praising God for what had occurred;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}for the man who was the subject of this miraculous cure was more than forty years old.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After they had been set at liberty, the apostles went to their friends and told them what the chief priests and the elders had said to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}All who heard their story, moved by a common impulse, raised their voices to God in prayer:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*Sovereign Lord, it is you who has made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and who, by the lips of our ancestor, your servant David, who spoke under the influence of the Holy Spirit, have said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Why did the nations rage,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and the peoples form vain designs?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The kings of the earth set their array,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and its rulers gathered together,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 against the Lord and against his Christ.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}There have indeed gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you has consecrated the Christ, not Herod and Pontius Pilate only, but the nations and the people of Israel besides \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}yet only to do what you, by your power and of your own will, did long ago destine to be done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Now, therefore, Lord, mark their threats, and enable your servants, with all fearlessness, to tell your message,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}while you stretch out your hand to heal, and cause signs and wonders to take place through the name of your holy servant Jesus.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When their prayer was ended, the place in which they were assembled was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to tell God\uc1\u8217*s message fearlessly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The whole body of those who had become believers in Christ were of one heart and mind. Not one of them claimed any of his goods as his own, but everything was held for the common use.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The apostles continued with great power to bear their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and God\uc1\u8217*s blessing rested on them all abundantly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Nor was there anyone in need among them, for all who were owners of land or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the sales{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and laid them at the apostles\uc1\u8217* feet; and then everyone received a share in proportion to his wants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}A Levite of Cyprian birth, named Joseph, (who had received from the apostles the additional name of \uc1\u8220*Barnabas\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* which means \uc1\u8220*The Consoler,\uc1\u8221*){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Sold a farm that belonged to him, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles\uc1\u8217* feet.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}There was, however, a man named Ananias, who, with his wife Sapphira, sold some property,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, with her connivance, kept back some of the proceeds. He brought only a part and laid it at the apostles\uc1\u8217* feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*Ananias,\uc1\u8217* Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*how is it that Satan has so taken possession of your heart that you have lied to the Holy Spirit, and kept back a part of the money paid for the land?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}While it was unsold, was not it your own? And after it was sold, was not the money at your own disposal? How did you come to think of such a thing? You have lied, not to people, but to God!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As Ananias heard these words, he fell down and expired; and everyone who heard of it was appalled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The young men got up, and, winding the body in a sheet, carried it out and buried it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*Is it true,\uc1\u8217* Peter asked, addressing her, \uc1\u8216*that you sold your land for such a sum?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* she answered, \uc1\u8216*we did.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then Peter said, \uc1\u8216*How did you come to agree to provoke the Spirit of the Lord? Listen! The footsteps of those who have buried your husband are at the door; and they will carry you out too.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Instantly Sapphira fell down at Peter\uc1\u8217*s feet and expired. On coming in, the young men found her dead; so they carried her out and buried her by her husband\uc1\u8217*s side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The whole church and all who heard of these events were appalled.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Many signs and wonders continued to occur among the people, through the instrumentality of the apostles, whose custom it was to meet all together in the Colonnade of Solomon;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}but of the rest no one ventured to join them. On the other hand, the people were full of their praise,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and still larger numbers, both of men and women, as they became believers in the Lord, were added to their number.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The consequence was that people would bring out their sick even into the streets, and lay them on mattresses and mats, in the hope that, as Peter came by, at least his shadow might fall on someone of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Besides this, the inhabitants of the towns round Jerusalem flocked into the city, bringing with them their sick and those who were troubled by foul spirits; and they were cured everyone.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}At this the high priest was roused to action, and he and all his supporters (who formed the party of the Sadducees), moved by jealousy,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}arrested the apostles, and had them placed in custody.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}An angel of the Lord, however, opened the prison doors at night and led them out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Go,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and stand in the Temple Courts, and tell the people the whole message of this new life.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}When they heard this, they went at daybreak into the Temple Courts, and began to teach. The high priest and his party, on their arrival, summoned the High Council, including all the leaders of the people among the Israelites, and sent to the jail to fetch the apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But, when the officers got there, they did not find them in the prison; so they returned and reported that,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}while they had found the goal barred securely and the guards posted at the doors, yet, on opening them, they had not found anyone inside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}When the officer in charge at the Temple and the chief priests heard their story, they were perplexed about the apostles and as to what all this would lead to.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Presently, however, someone came and told them, that the men whom they had put in prison were actually standing in the Temple Courts, teaching the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then, the officer went with his men and fetched the apostles \uc1\u8211* without using violence, for they were afraid of being stoned by the people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and then brought them before the Council. The high priest demanded an explanation from them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*We gave you strict orders,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*not to teach in this name. Yet you have actually flooded Jerusalem with your teaching, and you want to make us responsible for the death of this man.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}To this Peter and the apostles replied, \uc1\u8216*We must obey God rather than people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The God of our ancestors raised Jesus, whom you put to death by hanging him on a cross.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}It is this Jesus whom God has exalted to his right hand, to be a guide and a Saviour, to give Israel repentance and forgiveness of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And we are witness to the truth of this, and so is the Holy Spirit \uc1\u8211* the gift of God to those who obey him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}The members of the Council became frantic with rage on hearing this, and were for putting the apostles to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}But Gamaliel, a Pharisee, who was a Doctor of the Law and who was held in universal respect, rose in the Council, and directed that the men should be taken out of court for a little while.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}He then said, \uc1\u8216*People of Israel, take care as to what you intend to do with these men.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For not long ago Theudas appeared, professing to be somebody, and was joined by a body of some four hundred men. But he was killed; and all his followers scattered and dwindled away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}After him, Judas the Galilean appeared at the time of the census, and induced people to follow him; yet he, too, perished and all his followers were dispersed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}And, in this present case, my advice to you is not to interfere with these men, but to leave them alone, for, if their designs and their work are merely of human origin, they will come to an end;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}but, if they are of divine origin, you will be powerless to put an end to them \uc1\u8211* or else you may find yourselves fighting against God!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}The Council followed his advice, and, calling the apostles in, had them flogged, and then, after cautioning them not to speak in the name of Jesus, set them free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}But the apostles left the Council, rejoicing that they had been thought worthy to suffer disgrace for that name;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}and never for a single day, either in the Temple Courts or in private houses, did they cease to teach, or to tell the good news of Jesus, the Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}About this time, when the number of the disciples was constantly increasing, complaints were made by the Greek speaking Jews against the Aramaic speaking Jews, that their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The Twelve, therefore, called together the general body of the disciples and said to them, \uc1\u8216*It is not well for us to see to the distribution at the tables and neglect God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore, friends, look for seven men of reputation among yourselves, wise and spiritually-minded men, and we will appoint them to attend to this matter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}while we, for our part, will devote ourselves to prayer, and to the delivery of the message.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}This proposal was unanimously agreed to; and the disciples chose Stephen \uc1\u8211* a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit \uc1\u8211* and Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicholas of Antioch, a former convert to Judaism;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and they brought these men to the apostles, who, after praying, placed their hands on them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So God\uc1\u8217*s message spread, and the number of the disciples continued to increase rapidly in Jerusalem, and a large body of the priests accepted the faith.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Meanwhile Stephen, divinely helped and strengthened, was showing great wonders and signs among the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But some members of the Synagogue of the Freed Slaves (as it was called), Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and Visitors from Cilicia and Roman Asia, were roused to action and began disputing with Stephen;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}yet they were quite unable to withstand the wisdom and the inspiration with which he spoke.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then they induced some men to assert that they had heard Stephen saying blasphemous things against Moses, and against God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and they stirred up the people, as well as the elders and the teachers of the Law, and set on Stephen, and arrested him, and brought him before the High Council.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There they produced witnesses who gave false evidence.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*This man,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*is incessantly saying things against this holy place and the Law;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}indeed, we have heard him declare that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and change the customs handed down to us by Moses.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The eyes of all the members of the Council were riveted on Stephen, and they saw his face looking like the face of an angel.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Then the high priest asked, \uc1\u8216*Is this true?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Stephen replied, \uc1\u8216*Brothers and fathers, hear what I have to say. God, who manifests himself in the glory, appeared to our ancestor Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, and before he settled in Haran, and said to him \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*Leave your country and your people, and come into the country that I will show you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And so Abraham left the country of the Chaldaeans and settled in Haran; and from there, after his father\uc1\u8217*s death, God caused him to migrate into this country, in which you are now living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God did not at that time give him any part of it, not even a foot of ground. But he promised to give him possession of it and his descendants after him, though at that time he had no child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}God\uc1\u8217*s words were these \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants will live in a foreign country, where they will be enslaved and ill-treated for four hundred years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But I myself will judge the nation, to which they will be enslaved,\uc1\u8221* God said, \uc1\u8220*and after that they will leave the country and worship me in this place.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then God made with Abraham the covenant of circumcision; and under it Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him when he was eight days old; and Isaac became the father of Jacob; and Jacob of the Twelve Patriarchs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The Patriarchs, out of jealousy, sold Joseph into slavery in Egypt; but God was with him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and delivered him out of all his troubles, and enabled him to win favour and show wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who appointed him Governor of Egypt and of his whole household.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then a famine spread over the whole of Egypt and Canaan, causing great distress, and our ancestors could find no food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Hearing, however, that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob sent our ancestors there on their first visit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In the course of their second visit, Joseph revealed himself to his brothers, and his family became known to Pharaoh.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Joseph sent an urgent invitation to his father Jacob and to his relatives, seventy-five persons in all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and so Jacob went down into Egypt. There he died, and our ancestors also,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and their bodies were removed to Shechem, and laid in the tomb which Abraham had bought for a sum of money from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As the time drew near for the fulfilment of the promise which God had made to Abraham, the people increased largely in numbers in Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}until a new king, who knew nothing of Joseph, came to the throne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This king acted deceitfully towards our people and ill-treated our ancestors, making them abandon their own infants, so that they should not be reared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}It was just at this time that Moses was born. He was an exceedingly beautiful child, and for three months was brought up in his own father\uc1\u8217*s house;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and, when he was abandoned, the daughter of Pharaoh found him and brought him up as her own son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Moses was educated in all the learning of the Egyptians, and proved his ability both by his words and actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}When he was in his fortieth year, he resolved to visit his fellow Israelites;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and, seeing an Israelite ill-treated, he defended him, and avenged the man, who was being wronged, by striking down the Egyptian.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He thought his own people would understand that God was using him to save them; but they failed to do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The next day he again appeared on the scene, when some of them were fighting, and tried to make peace between them. \uc1\u8220*Men,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*you are brothers; how is it that you are ill-treating one another?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But the man who was ill-treating his fellow workman pushed Moses aside saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Who made you a ruler and judge over us?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Do you mean to make away with me as you did yesterday with that Egyptian?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}At these words Moses took to flight, and became an exile in Midian; and there he had two sons born to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Forty years had passed when there appeared to him, in the desert of Mount Sinai, an angel in a flame of fire in a bush.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}When Moses saw it, he was astonished at the vision; but on his going nearer to look at it more closely, the voice of the Lord was heard to say \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}\uc1\u8220*I am the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.\uc1\u8221* Moses trembled, and did not dare to look.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then the Lord said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Take your sandals off your feet, for the spot where you are standing is holy ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}I have seen the oppression of my people who are in Egypt, and heard their groans, and I have come down to deliver them. Come now and I will send you into Egypt.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}This same Moses, whom they had disowned with the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Who made you a ruler and a judge?\uc1\u8221* was the man whom God sent to be both a ruler and a deliverer, under the guidance of the angel that had appeared to him in the bush.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}He it was who led them out, after he had shown wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the desert during forty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}This was the Moses who said to the people of Israel \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*God will raise up for you, from among yourselves, a prophet, as he raised up me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}He, too, it was who was present at the assembly in the desert, with the angel who talked to him on Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors, and who received living truths to impart to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Yet our ancestors refused him obedience; more than that, they rejected him, and in their hearts turned back to Egypt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}while they said to Aaron \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Make us Gods who will lead the way for us, since, as for this Moses who has brought us out of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}That was the time when they made the calf and offered sacrifice to their idol, and held festivities in honour of their own handiwork!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}So God turned from them and left them to the worship of the Starry Host, as is written in the book of the prophets \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Did you offer victims and sacrifices to me, house of Israel,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all those forty years in the desert?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}You took with you the tent where Moloch is worshipped
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the star of the god Rephan \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the images which you had made to worship.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 Therefore I will exile you beyond Babylon.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Our ancestors had the tent where they worshipped God in the desert, constructed, just as he who spoke to Moses had directed him to make it, after the model which he had seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}This tent, which was handed down to them, was brought into this country by our ancestors who accompanied Joshua (at the conquest of the nations that God drove out before their advance), and remained here until the time of David.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}David found favour with God, and prayed that he might provide the God of Jacob with a place to reside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}But it was Solomon who built a house for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Yet it is not in buildings made by hands that the Most High dwells. As the prophet says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}\uc1\u8220*The heavens are a throne for me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the earth a stool for my feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 What manner of house will you build me, asks the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or what place is there where I may rest?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}Was it not my hand that made all these things?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Stubborn people, heathen in heart and ears, you are for ever resisting the Holy Spirit; your ancestors did it, and you are doing it still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}Which of the prophets escaped persecution at their hands? They killed those who foretold the coming of the righteous one; of whom you, in your turn, have now become the betrayers and murderers \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}you who received the Law as transmitted by angels and yet failed to keep it.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}As they listened to this, the Council grew frantic with rage, and gnashed their teeth at Stephen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}He, filled as he was with the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes intently on the heavens, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}\uc1\u8216*Look,\uc1\u8217* he exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}At this, with a loud shout, they stopped their ears and all rushed on him, forced him outside the city,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}and began to stone him, the witnesses laying their clothes at the feet of a young man named Saul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 59}And they stoned Stephen, while he cried to the Lord, \uc1\u8216*Lord Jesus! Receive my spirit!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 60}Falling on his knees, he called out loudly, \uc1\u8216*Lord! Do not charge them with this sin;\uc1\u8217* and with these words he fell asleep.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}Saul approved of his being put to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
On that very day a great persecution broke out against the church which was in Jerusalem; and its members, with the exception of the apostles, were all scattered over the districts of Judea and Samaria.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Some religious men buried Stephen, with loud lamentations for him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But Saul began to devastate the church; he entered house after house, dragged out men and women alike, and threw them into prison.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now those who were scattered in different directions went from place to place proclaiming the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and there began to preach the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The people, one and all, listened attentively to what Philip told them, when they heard of, and saw, the miracles which he was working.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For there were many instances of people with foul spirits, where the spirits, with loud screams, came out of them; and many who were paralysed or lame were cured,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}so that there was great rejoicing throughout that city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There was staying in the city a man named Simon, who had been practicing magic there and mystifying the Samaritan people, giving himself out to be some great being.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Everyone, high and low, paid attention to him. \uc1\u8220*This man,\uc1\u8221* they used to say, \uc1\u8220*must be that power of God which people call \uc1\u8216*The Great Power.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And they paid attention to him because they had for a long time been mystified by his magic arts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}However, when they came to believe Philip, as he told them the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Even Simon believed, and after his baptism attached himself to Philip, and was in his turn mystified at seeing signs and great miracles constantly occurring.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When the apostles at Jerusalem heard that the Samaritans had welcomed God\uc1\u8217*s message, they sent Peter and John to them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and they, on their arrival, prayed that the Samaritans might receive the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}(As yet the Spirit had not descended on any of them; they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then Peter and John placed their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}When Simon saw that it was through the placing of the apostles\uc1\u8217* hands on them that the Spirit was given, he brought them a sum of money and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8216*Give me also this power of yours, so that, if I place my hands on anyone, he may receive the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*A curse on you and on your silver,\uc1\u8217* Peter exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*for thinking that God\uc1\u8217*s free gift can be bought with money!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}You have no share or part in our message, for your heart is not right with God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore repent of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord, that, if possible, you may be forgiven for such a thought;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}for I see that you have fallen into the bitterness of envy and the fetters of sin.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8216*Pray to the Lord for me, all of you,\uc1\u8217* Simon answered, \uc1\u8216*so that none of the things you have spoken of may happen to me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Peter and John, having borne their testimony and delivered the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message, returned to Jerusalem, telling the good news, as they went, in many Samaritan villages.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Meanwhile an angel of the Lord had said to Philip, \uc1\u8216*Set out on a journey southwards, along the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gaza.\uc1\u8217* (It is now deserted).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So Philip set out on a journey; and on his way he came on an official of high rank, in the service of Candace, Queen of the Abyssinians. He was her treasurer, and had been to Jerusalem to worship,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and was now on his way home, sitting in his carriage and reading the prophet Isaiah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The Spirit said to Philip, \uc1\u8216*Go up to the carriage over there and keep close to it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}So Philip ran up, and he heard the Abyssinian reading the prophet Isaiah.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Do you understand what you are reading?\uc1\u8217* he asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*How can I,\uc1\u8217* the other answered, \uc1\u8216*unless someone will explain it to me?\uc1\u8217* and he invited Philip to get up and sit by his side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}The passage of scripture which he was reading was this \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Like a sheep, he was led away to slaughter,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and as a lamb is dumb in the hands of its shearer,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 so he refrains from opening his lips.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}He was humiliated and justice was denied him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Who will tell the story of his generation?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 For his life is cut off from earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Now,\uc1\u8217* said the Treasurer, addressing Philip, \uc1\u8216*tell me, of whom is the prophet speaking? Of himself, or of someone else?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Then Philip began, and, taking this passage as his text, told him the good news about Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Presently, as they were going along the road, they came to some water, and the Treasurer exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*Look! Here is water; what is to prevent my being baptized?\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}  Some later manuscripts add: Philip said, \uc1\u8216*If you believe with your whole heart, you may.\uc1\u8217* And he replied, \uc1\u8216*I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.\uc1\u8217* }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}So he ordered the carriage to stop, and they went down into the water \uc1\u8211* both Philip and the Treasurer \uc1\u8211* and Philip baptized him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But, when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the Treasurer saw no more of him; for he continued his journey with a joyful heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But Philip was found at Ashdod, and, as he went on his way, he told the good news in all the towns through which he passed, until he came to Caesarea.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Meanwhile Saul, still breathing murderous threats against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and asked him to give him letters to the Jewish congregations at Damascus, authorising him, if he found there any supporters of the Way, whether men or women, to have them put in chains and brought to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}While on his journey, as he was nearing Damascus, suddenly a light from the heavens flashed around him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*Who are you, Lord?\uc1\u8217* he asked.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,\uc1\u8217* the voice answered;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}\uc1\u8216*Yet stand up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The men traveling with Saul were meanwhile standing speechless; they heard the sound of the voice, but saw no one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}When Saul got up from the ground, though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So his men led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and for three days he was unable to see, and took nothing either to eat or to drink.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Now there was at Damascus a disciple named Ananias, to whom, in a vision, the Lord said, \uc1\u8216*Ananias.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes, Lord,\uc1\u8217* he answered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8216*Go at once,\uc1\u8217* said the Lord, \uc1\u8216*to the Straight Street, and ask at Judas\uc1\u8217*s house for a man named Saul, from Tarsus. He is at this moment praying,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and he has seen, in a vision, a man named Ananias coming in and placing his hands on him, so that he may recover his sight.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8216*Lord,\uc1\u8217* exclaimed Ananias, \uc1\u8216*I have heard from many people about this man \uc1\u8211* how much harm he has done at Jerusalem to your people there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And, here, too, he holds authority from the chief priests to put in chains all those who invoke your name.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But the Lord said to him, \uc1\u8216*Go, for this man is my chosen instrument to uphold my name before the Gentiles and their kings, and the people of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I will myself show him all that he has to suffer for my name.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So Ananias went, entered the house, and, placing his hands on Saul, said, \uc1\u8216*Saul, my brother, I have been sent by the Lord \uc1\u8211* by Jesus, who appeared to you on your way here \uc1\u8211* so that you may recover your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Instantly it seemed as if a film fell from Saul\uc1\u8217*s eyes, and his sight was restored. Then he got up and was baptized,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and, after he had taken food, he felt his strength return.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 Saul stayed for some days with the disciples who were at Damascus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and at once began in the synagogues to proclaim Jesus as the Son of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}All who heard him were amazed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Is not this,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*the man who worked havoc in Jerusalem among those that invoke this name, and who had also come here for the express purpose of having such persons put in chains and taken before the chief priests?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Saul\uc1\u8217*s influence, however, kept steadily increasing, and he confounded the Jewish people who lived in Damascus by the proofs that he gave that Jesus was the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After some time some of them laid a plot to kill Saul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but it became known to him. They even watched the gates day and night, to kill him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}but his disciples let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}On his arrival in Jerusalem, Saul attempted to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, as they did not believe that he was really a disciple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Barnabas, however, taking him by the hand, brought him to the apostles, and told them the whole story of how Saul on his journey had seen the Lord, and how the Lord had talked to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken out fearlessly in the name of Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}After that, Saul remained in Jerusalem, in close contact with the apostles; and he spoke fearlessly in the name of the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}talking and arguing with the Jews of foreign birth, who, however, made attempts to kill him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But, when the followers found this out, they took him down to Caesarea, and sent him on his way to Tarsus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And so it came about that the church, throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, enjoyed peace and became firmly established; and, ordering its life by respect for the Lord and the help of the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Peter, while traveling from place to place throughout the country, went down to visit the people of Christ living at Lydda.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}There he found a man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years with paralysis.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}\uc1\u8216*Aeneas,\uc1\u8217* Peter said to him, \uc1\u8216*Jesus Christ cures you. Get up, and make your bed.\uc1\u8217* Aeneas got up at once;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}and all the inhabitants of Lydda and of the Plain of Sharon saw him, and came over to the Lord\uc1\u8217*s side.
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}At Joppa there lived a disciple whose name was Tabitha, which is in Greek \uc1\u8220*Dorcas\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* a Gazelle. Her life was spent in doing kind and charitable actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Just at that time she was taken ill, and died; and they had washed her body and laid it out in an upstairs room.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Joppa was near Lydda, and the disciples, having heard that Peter was at Lydda, sent two men with the request that he come to them without delay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Peter returned with them at once. On his arrival, he was taken upstairs, and all the widows came round him in tears, showing the coats and other clothing which Dorcas had made while she was among them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}But Peter sent everybody out of the room, and knelt down and prayed. Then, turning to the body, he said, \uc1\u8216*Tabitha! Stand up.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
She opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}Giving her his hand, Peter raised her up, and, calling in the widows and others of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, presented her to them alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}This became known all through Joppa, and numbers of people came to believe in the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}And Peter stayed some days at Joppa with a tanner named Simon.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in the regiment known as the \uc1\u8220*Italian Regiment,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}A religious man and one who reverenced God, with all his household. He was liberal in his charities to the people, and prayed to God constantly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}One afternoon, about three o\uc1\u8217*clock, he distinctly saw in a vision an angel from God come to him, and call him by name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Cornelius fixed his eyes on him and, in great alarm, said, \uc1\u8216*What is it, Lord?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Your prayers and your charities,\uc1\u8217* the angel answered, \uc1\u8216*have been an acceptable offering to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And now, send messengers to Joppa and fetch a man called Simon, who is also known as Peter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He is lodging with a tanner named Simon, who has a house near the sea.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When the angel, who had spoken to him, had gone, Cornelius called two servants and a religious soldier, who was one of his constant attendants,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and, after telling them the whole story, sent them to Joppa.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}On the next day, while these men were on their way, just as they were nearing the town, Peter went up on the housetop about midday to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He became hungry and wanted something to eat; but while it was being prepared, he fell into a trance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and saw that the heavens were open, and that something like a great sail was descending, let down by its four corners towards the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In it were all kinds of quadrupeds, reptiles, and birds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then he was aware of a voice which said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Stand up, Peter, kill something, and eat.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*No, Lord, I cannot,\uc1\u8217* answered Peter, \uc1\u8216*for I have never eaten anything defiled and unclean.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Again he was aware of a voice which said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*What God has pronounced clean, do not regard as defiled.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This happened three times, and then suddenly it was all taken up into the heavens.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}While Peter was still perplexed as to the meaning of the vision that he had seen, the men sent by Cornelius, having enquired the way to Simon\uc1\u8217*s house, came up to the gate,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and called out and asked if the Simon, who was also known as Peter, was lodging there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Peter was still pondering over the vision, when the Spirit said to him, \uc1\u8216*There are two men looking for you at this moment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Go down at once and do not hesitate to go with them, for I have sent them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Peter went down to the men and said, \uc1\u8216*I am the person you are looking for. What is your reason for coming?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The men replied, \uc1\u8216*Our centurion, Cornelius, a pious man who reverences God and is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, has been instructed by a holy angel to send for you to his house, and to listen to what you have to say.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So Peter invited them in and entertained them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 The next day he lost no time in setting out with them, accompanied by some of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers from Joppa;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and the day following he entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them, and had invited his relatives and intimate friends to meet them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So, when Peter entered the city, Cornelius met him, and, throwing himself at Peter\uc1\u8217*s feet, bowed to the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Peter, however, lifted him up, saying as he did so, \uc1\u8216*Stand up, I am only human like yourself.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Talking with him as he went, Peter entered the house, where he found a large gathering of people, to whom he said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*You are doubtless aware that it is forbidden for a Jew to be intimate with a foreigner, or even to enter his house; and yet God has shown me that I ought not to call anyone defiled or unclean.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}That was why I came, when I was sent for, without raising any objection. And now I ask your reason for sending for me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}\uc1\u8216*Just three days ago this very hour,\uc1\u8217* Cornelius said, \uc1\u8216*I was in my house, saying the Afternoon Prayers, when a man in dazzling clothing suddenly stood before me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8220*Cornelius,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*your prayer has been heard, and your charities have been accepted, by God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Therefore send to Joppa, and invite the Simon, who is also known as Peter, to come here. He is lodging in the house of Simon the tanner, near the sea.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Accordingly I sent to you at once, and you have been so good as to come. And now we are all here in the presence of God, to listen to all that you have been instructed by the Lord to say.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Then Peter began.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*I see, beyond all doubt,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*that God does not show partiality,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}but that in every nation he who reverences him and does what is right is acceptable to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}God has sent his message to the Israelites and told them, through Jesus Christ, the good news of peace \uc1\u8211* and Jesus is Lord of all!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}You yourselves know the story which spread through all Judea, how, beginning form Galilee, after the baptism which John proclaimed \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}the story, I mean, of Jesus of Nazareth, and how God consecrated him his Christ by enduing him with the Holy Spirit and with power; and how he went about doing good and curing all who were under the power of the devil, because God was with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}We are ourselves, too, witnesses to all that he did in Judea and in Jerusalem; yet they put him to death by hanging him on a cross!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}This Jesus God raised on the third day, and enabled him to appear,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}not indeed to everyone, but to witnesses chosen beforehand by God \uc1\u8211* to us, who ate and drank with him after his resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}Further, God charged us to proclaim to the people, and solemnly affirm, that it is Jesus who has been appointed by God judge of the living and the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}To him it is that all the prophets bear witness, when they say that everyone who believes in him receives through his name forgiveness of sins.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}Before Peter had finished saying these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all who were listening to the message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}Those converts from Judaism, who had come with Peter, were amazed that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been bestowed even on the Gentiles;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}for they heard them speaking in different languages and extolling God. At this Peter asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}\uc1\u8216*Can anyone refuse the water for the baptism of these people, now that they have received the Holy Spirit as we did ourselves?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}And he directed that they should be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ; after which they asked him to stay there a few days longer.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}The apostles and the followers throughout Judea heard that even the Gentiles had welcomed God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But, when Peter went up to Jerusalem, those who were converts from Judaism began to attack him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}on the ground that he had visited people who were not circumcised, and had taken meals with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So Peter began to relate the facts to them as they had occurred.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*I was in the town of Joppa,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*and was praying; and, while in a trance, I saw a vision. There was something like a great sail descending, let down by its four corners out of the heavens; and it came right down to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Looking intently at it, I began to distinguish quadrupeds, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and I also heard a voice saying to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Stand up, Peter, kill something and eat.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*No, Lord, I cannot,\uc1\u8221* I answered, \uc1\u8220*for nothing defiled or unclean has ever passed my lips.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then a second time there came a voice from the heavens. \uc1\u8220*What God has pronounced clean\uc1\u8221*, it said, \uc1\u8220*you must not call defiled.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This happened three times, and then all was drawn up again into the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}At that moment three men, who had been sent from Caesarea to see me, came up to the house in which we were.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The Spirit told me to go with them without hesitation. These six companions also went with me. And, when we came into the man\uc1\u8217*s house,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}he told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and how the angel had said to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Send to Joppa and fetch the Simon, who is also known as Peter;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}for he will tell you truths, which will prove the means of salvation to you and all your household.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I had but just begun to speak,\uc1\u8217* continued Peter, \uc1\u8216*when the Holy Spirit fell on them, exactly as on us at the first;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and I recalled the saying of the Master \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Since then, God had given them the very same gift as he gave us when we became believers in Jesus Christ the Master \uc1\u8211* who was I that I could thwart God?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}On hearing this statement, they said no more, but broke out into praise of God. \uc1\u8216*So even to the Gentiles,\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed, \uc1\u8216*God has granted the repentance which leads to life!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Now those who had been scattered in different directions, in consequence of the persecution that followed the death of Stephen, went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, telling the message \uc1\u8211* but only to Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Some of them, however, who were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, on coming to Antioch, addressed themselves also to the Jews of foreign birth, telling them the good news about that Lord Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The power of the Lord was with them, so that a great number who had learned to believe came over to the Lord\uc1\u8217*s side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The news about them reached the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}On coming there he saw to his great joy these tokens of the loving kindness of God, and encouraged them all to make up their minds to be faithful to the Lord \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For Barnabas was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith \uc1\u8211* and a large number of people took their stand on the Lord\uc1\u8217*s side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Afterwards Barnabas left for Tarsus to look for Saul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and, when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. And so it came about that, for a whole year, they attended the meetings of the church there, and taught a large number of people; and it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called \uc1\u8220*Christians.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}During this time, some prophets came to Antioch from Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}One of them, named Agabus, came forward and, under the influence of the Spirit, foretold a great famine that was to spread over all the world \uc1\u8211* a famine which occurred in the reign of Claudius.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}So the disciples, without exception, determined, in proportion to their means, to send something to help the followers living in Judea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And this they did, sending it to the church elders by Barnabas and Saul.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}It was at that time that King Herod began to ill-treat some of the members of the church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He had James, the brother of John, beheaded;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and, when he saw that the Jews were pleased with this, he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (This was during the Festival of the unleavened bread.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}After seizing Peter, Herod put him in prison, and entrusted him to the keeping of four Guards of four soldiers each, intending, after the Passover, to bring him up before the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So Peter was kept in prison, but meanwhile the prayers of the church were being earnestly offered to God on his behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Just when Herod was intending to bring him before the people, on that very night Peter was asleep between two soldiers, chained to them both, while there were sentries in front of the door, guarding the prison.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Suddenly an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. The angel struck Peter on the side, and roused him with the words, \uc1\u8216*Get up quickly.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The chains dropped from his wrists, and then the angel said, \uc1\u8216*Put on your belt and sandals.\uc1\u8217* When Peter had done so, the angel added, \uc1\u8216*Throw your cloak round you and follow me.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Peter followed him out, not knowing that what was happening under the angel\uc1\u8217*s guidance was real, but thinking that he was seeing a vision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Passing the first Guard, and then the second, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened to them of itself; and, when they had passed through that, and had walked along one street, all at once the angel left him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then Peter came to himself and said, \uc1\u8216*Now I know beyond all doubt that the Lord has sent his angel, and has rescued me from Herod\uc1\u8217*s hands and from all that the Jewish people have been expecting.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As soon as he realized what had happened, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John who was also known as Mark, where a number of people were gathered together, praying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On his knocking at the door in the gate, a maidservant, named Rhoda, came to answer it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}She recognized Peter\uc1\u8217*s voice, but in her joy left the gate unopened, and ran in, and told them that Peter was standing outside.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*You are mad!\uc1\u8217* they exclaimed. But, when she persisted that it was so, they said, \uc1\u8216*It must be his spirit!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Meanwhile Peter went on knocking, and, when they opened the gate and saw him, they were amazed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Peter signed to them with his hand to be silent, and then told them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison, adding, \uc1\u8216*Tell James and the others all this.\uc1\u8217* Then he left the house, and went away to another place.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}In the morning there was a great stir among the soldiers \uc1\u8211* what could have become of Peter!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And, when Herod had made further search for him and failed to find him, he closely questioned the Guard, and ordered them away to execution. Then he went down from Judea to stay at Caesarea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}It happened that Herod was deeply offended with the people of Tyre and Sidon, but they went in a body to him, and, having succeeded in winning over Blastus, the Chamberlain, they begged Herod for a reconciliation, because their country was dependent on the king\uc1\u8217*s for its food supply.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On an appointed day Herod, wearing his state robes, seated himself on his throne, and delivered an oration.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The people kept shouting, \uc1\u8216*It is the voice of God, and not of a person!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Instantly an angel of the Lord struck him, because he did not give God the glory; and he was attacked with worms, and died.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Meanwhile the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message kept extending, and spreading far and wide.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}When Barnabas and Saul had carried out their mission, they returned to Jerusalem, and took with them John, who was also known as Mark.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs44 The Church and the Gentiles

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Acts of the Apostle Paul

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Among the members of the church at Antioch there were several prophets and teachers \uc1\u8211* Barnabas, Simeon who was known by the name of \uc1\u8220*Black\uc1\u8221*, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen, foster-brother of Prince Herod, and Saul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}While they were engaged in the worship of the Lord and were fasting, the Holy Spirit said, \uc1\u8216*Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul, for the work to which I have called them.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Accordingly, after fasting and prayer, they placed their hands on them and dismissed them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Barnabas and Saul, sent on this mission, as they were, by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and from there sailed to Cyprus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On reaching Salamis, they began to tell the message of God in the Jewish synagogues; and they had John with them as an assistant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After passing through the whole island, they reached Paphos, where they found an astrologer who pretended to be a prophet \uc1\u8211* a Jew by birth, whose name was Barjoshua.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He was at the court of the Governor, Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who sent for Barnabas and Saul and asked to be told God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But Elymas, the astrologer (for that is the meaning of the word), opposed them, eager to divert the Governor\uc1\u8217*s attention from the faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}However, Saul (who is the same as Paul), full of the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes on him and said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*You incarnation of deceit and all fraud! You son of the devil! You opponent of all that is good! Will you never cease to divert the straight paths of the Lord? Listen!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The hand of the Lord is on you even now, and you will be blind for a time and unable to see the sun.\uc1\u8217* Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him, and he went feeling about for someone to guide him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When the Governor saw what had happened, he became a believer in Christ, being greatly impressed by the teaching about the Lord.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}After this, Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and went to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them and returned to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The others went on from Perga and arrived at Antioch in Pisidia. There they went into the synagogue on the Sabbath and took their seats.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}After the reading of the Law and the prophets, the synagogue leader sent them this message \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Friends, if you have any helpful words to address to the people, now is the time to speak.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So Paul rose and, motioning with his hand, said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*People of Israel and all here who worship God, hear what I have to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors, and during their stay in Egypt increased the prosperity of the people, and then with uplifted arm brought them out from that land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For about forty years he bore with them in the desert;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}then, after destroying seven heathen nations in Canaan, he allotted their land to this people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For about four hundred and fifty years. In later times he gave them Judges, of whom the prophet Samuel was the last.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And, when they demanded a king, God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, who reigned for forty years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}After removing him, he raised David to the throne, and bore this testimony to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*In David, the son of Jesse, I have found a man after my own heart, who will carry out all my purposes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}It was from this man\uc1\u8217*s descendants that God, in accordance with his promise, gave Israel a Saviour \uc1\u8211* Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}John having first proclaimed, before the appearance of Jesus, a baptism on repentance for all the people of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}As John was drawing towards the end of his career, he said \uc1\u8220*What do you suppose that I am? I am not the Christ. But there is \uc1\u8216*one coming\uc1\u8217* after me, whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Brothers and sisters, descendants of Abraham, and all those among you who worship God, it was to us that the message of this salvation was sent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The people of Jerusalem and their leaders, failing to recognise Jesus, and not understanding the utterances of the prophets that are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}They found no ground at all for putting him to death, and yet demanded his execution from Pilate;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and, after carrying out everything written about him, they took Jesus down from the cross, and laid him in a tomb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But God raised him from the dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and he appeared for many days to those who had gone up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, and who are now witnesses for him to the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}We also have good news to tell you, about the promise made to our ancestors \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}That our children have had this promise completely fulfilled to them by God, by his raising Jesus. That is just what is said in the second Psalm \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You are my Son; this day I have become your Father.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}As to his raising Jesus from the dead, never again to return to corruption, this is what is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will give to you the sacred promises made to David;\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}And, therefore, in another Psalm it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You will not give up the Holy One to undergo corruption.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}David, after obediently doing God\uc1\u8217*s will in his own time, fell asleep and was laid by the side of his ancestors, and did undergo corruption;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}but Jesus, whom God raised from the dead, did not undergo corruption.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}I would, therefore, like you to know, friends, that through Jesus forgiveness of sins is being proclaimed to you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and that, in union with him, everyone who believes in him is absolved from every sin from which under the Law of Moses you could not be absolved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Beware, therefore, that what is said in the prophets does not come true of you \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}\uc1\u8220*Look, you despisers, and wonder, and perish;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for I am doing a deed in your days \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 a deed which, though told you in full, you will never believe\uc1\u8221*.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}As Paul and Barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people begged for a repetition of this teaching on the next Sabbath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}After the congregation had dispersed, many of the Jews, and of the converts who joined in their worship, followed Paul and Barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue to rely on the loving kindness of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}On the following Sabbath, almost all the city gathered to hear God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}But the sight of the crowds of people filled the minds of the Jews with jealousy, and they kept contradicting Paul\uc1\u8217*s statements in violent language.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}Then Paul and Barnabas spoke out fearlessly, and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*It was necessary that the message of God should be told to you first; but, since you reject it and reckon yourselves not worthy of the eternal life \uc1\u8211* we turn to the Gentiles!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}For this is the Lord\uc1\u8217*s command to us \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I have destined you for a light to the Gentiles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 a means of salvation to the ends of the earth\uc1\u8221*.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}On hearing this, the Gentiles were glad and extolled God\uc1\u8217*s message; and all those who had been enrolled for eternal life became believers in Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}and the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message was carried throughout that district.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}But the Jews incited the women of high social standing who worshiped with them, and the leading men of the town, and started a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their region.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}They, however, shook the dust off their feet in protest,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}and went to Iconium, leaving the disciples full of joy and of the Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}The same thing occurred in Iconium, where Paul and Barnabas went into the Jewish synagogue, and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks believed in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the Gentiles, and poisoned their minds against the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore Paul and Barnabas spent a long time there, and spoke out fearlessly, relying on the Lord, who confirmed the message of his love by permitting signs and wonders to take place at their hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But the townspeople were divided, some siding with the Jews, some with the apostles;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, when there was an attempt on the part of both Gentiles and Jews, with their leaders, to resort to violence and to stone them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}the apostles heard of it, and took refuge in Lystra and Derbe, towns in Lycaonia, and in the district round,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and there they continued to tell the good news.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the streets of Lystra there used to sit a man who had no power in his feet; he had been lame from his birth, and had never walked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This man was listening to Paul speaking, when Paul, looking intently at him, and seeing that he had the faith to be healed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}said loudly, \uc1\u8216*Stand upright on your feet.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
The man leaped up, and began walking about,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and the crowd, seeing what Paul had done, called out in the Lycaonian language, \uc1\u8216*The Gods have come down to us in human form.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So they called Barnabas \uc1\u8220*Zeus,\uc1\u8221* and Paul \uc1\u8220*Hermes,\uc1\u8221* because he took the lead in speaking;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and the priest of Zeus-beyond-the-Walls, accompanied by the crowd, brought bullocks and garlands to the gates, with the intention of offering sacrifices.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Friends, why are you doing this?\uc1\u8217* they shouted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8216*We are only people like yourselves, and we have come with the good news that you should turn away from these follies to a living God, who made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In bygone times he permitted all the nations to go their own ways.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Yet he has not failed to give you, in the good he does, some revelation of himself \uc1\u8211* sending you from heaven rain and fruitful seasons, and gladdening your hearts with plenty and good cheer.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Even with this appeal they could hardly restrain the people from offering sacrifice to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Presently, however, there came some Jews from Antioch, and Iconium who, after they had won over the people, stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the town, thinking him to be dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But, when the disciples had gathered round him, he got up and went back into the town; the next day he went with Barnabas to Derbe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}After telling the good news throughout that town, and making a number of converts, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}reassuring the minds of the disciples, urging them to remain true to the faith, and showing that it is only through many troubles that we can enter the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They also appointed elders for them in every church, and, after prayer and fasting, commended them to the Lord in whom they had learned to believe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Paul and Barnabas then went through Pisidia, and came into Pamphylia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}and, after telling the message at Perga, went down to Attaleia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}From there they sailed to Antioch \uc1\u8211* the place where they had been committed to the gracious care of God for the work which they had now finished.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}After their arrival, they gathered the church together, and gave an account of all that God had helped them to do, and especially how he had opened to the Gentiles the door of faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and at Antioch they stayed with the disciples for a considerable time.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}But certain persons came down from Judea, and began to teach the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers that, unless they were circumcised, in accordance with the custom required by Moses, they could not be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This gave rise to a serious dispute, and much discussion, between Paul and Barnabas and these people, and it was therefore settled that Paul and Barnabas and others of their number should go up to Jerusalem, to consult the apostles and church elders about the matter under discussion.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The church, therefore, sent them on their journey, and they made their way through Phoenicia and Samaria, telling the story of the conversion of the Gentiles, to the great joy of all the followers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}On their arrival at Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the elders, and gave an account of all that God had helped them to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Some of the Pharisees\uc1\u8217* party, however, who had become believers in Christ, came forward and declared that they were bound to circumcise converts and to direct them to observe the Law of Moses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The apostles and the church elders held a meeting to consider this question.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After much discussion, Peter rose and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*You, my friends, know well that long ago God singled me out \uc1\u8211* that through my lips the Gentiles should hear the message of the good news, and become believers in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now God, who reads all hearts, declared his acceptance of the Gentiles, by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He made no distinction between them and us, when he purified their hearts by their faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Why, then, do you now provoke God, by putting on the necks of these disciples a yoke which neither our ancestors nor we were able to bear?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}No, it is through the loving kindness of the Lord Jesus that we, just as they do, believe that we have been saved.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Every voice in the assembly was hushed, as they listened to Barnabas and Paul, while they gave an account of all the signs and wonders which God had shown among the Gentiles through them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}After they had finished speaking, James addressed the Council.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Friends,\uc1\u8217* he began, \uc1\u8216*hear what I have to say.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Simon has described the manner in which God first visited the Gentiles, in order to take from among them a people to bear his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And that is in harmony with the words of the prophets, where they say \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*After this I will return;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will rebuild the house of David which has fallen \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 its ruins I will rebuild,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will set it up once more;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}that so the rest of mankind may earnestly seek the Lord \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 even all the Gentiles on whom my name has been bestowed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}says the Lord, as he does these things, known from long ago.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}In my judgment, therefore, we should not add to the difficulties of those Gentiles who are turning to God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}but we should write to them to abstain from food that has been polluted by being sacrificed to idols, from impurity, from eating the flesh of strangled animals, and from blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For in every town, for generations past, there have been those who preach Moses, read as he is in the synagogues every Sabbath.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}It was then decided by the apostles and the elders, with the assent of the whole church, to choose some of their number, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. Those chosen were Judas (called Barsabas) and Silas, who were leaders among the community.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They were bearers of the following letter \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
\uc1\u8220*The apostles, and the followers who are the church elders, send their greetings to the followers of the Lord of Gentile birth in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}As we had heard that some of our number had upset you by their assertions, and unsettled your minds \uc1\u8211* without instructions from us \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}We met and decided to choose certain men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}We are accordingly sending Judas and Silas, and they will tell you by word of mouth what we are now writing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}We have, therefore, decided, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, to lay no further burden on you beyond these necessary conditions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}That you abstain from food offered to idols, from blood, from eating the flesh of strangled animals, and from impurity. If you guard yourselves against such things, it will be well with you. Farewell.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}So the bearers of this letter were sent on their way, and went down to Antioch. There they called a meeting of all the followers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and delivered the letter, the reading of which caused great rejoicing by its encouraging contents.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, further encouraged the them by many an address, and strengthened their faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}After some stay, they were dismissed with kind farewells from the followers, and returned to those who had sent them.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}  Some later manuscripts add: But Silas decided to stay. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Paul and Barnabas, however, remained in Antioch, where they taught and, with the help of many others, told the good news of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Some time after this, Paul said to Barnabas, \uc1\u8216*Let us go back and visit the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers in every town in which we have told the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message, and see how they are prospering.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Barnabas wished to take with them John, whose other name was Mark;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}but Paul felt that they ought not to take with them the man who had deserted them in Pamphylia, and had not gone on with them to their work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}This caused such unpleasant feeling between them that they parted ways, Barnabas taking Mark and sailing for Cyprus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}while Paul chose Silas for his companion and, after he had been committed by the followers to the gracious care of the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}started on his journey and went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches in the faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Among other places Paul went to Derbe and Lystra. At the latter place they found a disciple, named Timothy, whose mother was a Jewish woman who was a believer, while his father was a Greek,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and who was well spoken of by the followers of the Lord in Lystra and Iconium.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Wishing to take this man with him on his journey, Paul caused him to be circumcised out of consideration for the Jews in that region, for they all knew that his father had been a Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}As they traveled from town to town, they gave the followers the decisions which had been reached by the apostles and church elders at Jerusalem, for them to observe.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So the churches grew stronger in the faith, and increased in numbers from day to day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They next went through the Phrygian district of Galatia, but were restrained by the Holy Spirit from delivering the message in Roman Asia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When they reached the borders of Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Passing through Mysia, they went down to Troas;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and there one night Paul saw a vision. A Macedonian was standing and appealing to him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come over to Macedonia and help us.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So, immediately after Paul had seen the vision, we looked for an opportunity to cross over to Macedonia, concluding that God had summoned us to tell the good news to the people there.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Accordingly we set sail from Troas, and ran before the wind to Samothrace, reaching Neapolis the next day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}From there we made our way to Philippi, which is the principal city of that part of Macedonia, and also a Roman Settlement.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
In that city we spent several days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}On the Sabbath we went outside the gate to the riverside, where we supposed there would be a place of prayer; and we sat down and talked to the women who were gathered there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Among them was a woman, named Lydia, belonging to Thyatira, a dealer in purple cloth, who was accustomed to join in the worship of God. The Lord touched this woman\uc1\u8217*s heart, so that she gave attention to the message delivered by Paul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and, when she and her household had been baptized, she urged us to become her guests.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Since you have shown your conviction,\uc1\u8217* she said, \uc1\u8216*that I really am a believer in the Lord, come and stay in my house.\uc1\u8217* And she insisted on our doing so.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}One day, as we were on our way to the place of prayer, we were met by a girl possessed by a divining spirit, who made large profits for her masters by fortune-telling.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This girl followed Paul and the rest of us, calling, \uc1\u8216*These men are servants of the most high God, and they are bringing you news of a way to salvation.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}She had been doing this for several days, when Paul, much vexed, turned and said to the spirit within her, \uc1\u8216*In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to leave her.\uc1\u8217* That very moment the spirit left her.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}When her masters saw that there was no hope of further profit from her, they seized Paul and Silas, dragged them into the public square to the authorities,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and took them before the Magistrates.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*These men are causing a great disturbance in our town,\uc1\u8217* they complained;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*They are Jews, and they are teaching customs which it is not right for us, as Romans, to sanction or adopt.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The mob rose as one person against them, and the Magistrates stripped them of their clothing and ordered them to be beaten with rods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After beating them severely, the Magistrates put them in prison, with orders to the jailer to keep them in safe custody.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}On receiving so strict an order, the Governor put them into the inner cell, and secured their feet in the stocks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}About midnight, while Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and while the prisoners were listening to them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}suddenly there was an earthquake of such violence that the jail was shaken to its foundations; all the doors flew open, and all the prisoners\uc1\u8217* chains were loosened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Roused from his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, the Governor drew his sword intending to kill himself, in the belief that the prisoners had escaped.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But Paul called our loudly, \uc1\u8216*Do not harm yourself; we are all here.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Calling for a light, the Governor rushed in, and flung himself trembling at the feet of Paul and Silas.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then he led them out, and said, \uc1\u8216*What must I do to be saved?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}\uc1\u8216*Believe in Jesus, our Lord,\uc1\u8217* they replied, \uc1\u8216*and you will be saved, you and your household too.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Then they spoke to him of God\uc1\u8217*s message, and to all his household as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And that very hour of the night he took them and washed their wounds, and he himself and everyone belonging to him were baptized without delay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Afterwards he took them up to his house and set before them something to eat, rejoicing that he, with all his household, had come to believe in God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}In the morning the Magistrates sent the guards with an order for the men to be discharged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}The jailer told Paul of his instructions. \uc1\u8216*The Magistrates have sent an order for your discharge,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*so you had better leave the place at once and go quietly away.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}But Paul\uc1\u8217*s answer to them was, \uc1\u8216*They have flogged us in public without trial, though we are Roman citizens, and they have put us in prison, and now they are for sending us out secretly! No, indeed! Let them come and take us out themselves.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}The guards reported his words to the Magistrates, who, on hearing that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, were alarmed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}and went to the prison, and did their best to conciliate them. Then they took them out, and begged them to leave the city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}When Paul and Silas left the prison, they went to Lydia\uc1\u8217*s house, and, after they had seen the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, and encouraged them, they left the place.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}After passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, Paul and Silas came to Thessalonica. Here the Jews had a synagogue;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, following his usual custom, Paul joined them, and for three Sabbaths addressed them, drawing his arguments from the scriptures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He laid before them and explained that the Christ must undergo suffering and rise from the dead; and \uc1\u8216*It is this man,\uc1\u8217* he declared, \uc1\u8216*who is the Christ \uc1\u8211* this Jesus about whom I am telling you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Some of the people were convinced, and threw in their lot with Paul and Silas, as did also a large body of Greeks who were accustomed to join in the Jewish services, and a great number of leading women.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But the Jewish leaders, becoming jealous, engaged some worthless fellows from the streets, and, getting a mob together, kept the city in an uproar. They attacked Jason\uc1\u8217*s house, with the intention of bringing Paul and Silas before the Popular Assembly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, not finding them there, they proceeded to drag Jason and some of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers before the city magistrates, shouting out,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*These men, who have turned the world upside down, have now come here,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and have been harboured by Jason! They are all defying the decrees of the Emperor. They say that someone else is king \uc1\u8211* a man called Jesus!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}On hearing this, the people and the city magistrates were much concerned;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and, before letting them go, they took bail from Jason and the others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}That very night the followers sent Paul and Silas off to Beroea; and on reaching that place, they went to the Jewish synagogue.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}These Jews of Beroea were better disposed than those in Thessalonica, for they welcomed the message with great readiness, and daily examined the scriptures to see if what was said was true.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As a consequence, many of them became believers in Christ, besides a considerable number of Greek women of position, and of men also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But, when the Jewish leaders in Thessalonica found out that God\uc1\u8217*s message had been delivered by Paul at Beroea, they came there too, exciting and disturbing the minds of the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The followers immediately arranged for Paul to go away to the coast, but both Silas and Timothy stayed behind in Beroea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The friends who escorted Paul took him as far as Athens, and, after receiving a message for Silas and Timothy to join him as quickly as possible, they started on their return.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}While Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his heart was stirred at seeing the whole city full of idols.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So he argued in the synagogue with the Jews and with those who joined in their worship, as well as daily in the public Square with those who happened to be there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Among others, some Epicurean and Stoic Philosophers joined issue with him. Some asked \uc1\u8216*What is this prater wanting to make out?\uc1\u8217*, while others said \uc1\u8216*He seems to be a preacher of foreign Deities.\uc1\u8217* (This was because he was telling the good news about Jesus and the resurrection).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}So they laid hold of him and took him to the Court of Areopagus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*May we hear,\uc1\u8217* they asked, \uc1\u8216*what new teaching this is which you are giving?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For you are bringing some strange things to our notice, and we should like to know what they mean.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}(All Athenians and the foreigners staying in the city found no time for anything else but telling, or listening to, the last new thing.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So Paul took his stand in the middle of the Court, and said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*People of Athens, on every hand I see signs of your being very devout.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For as I was going about, looking at your sacred shrines, I came upon an altar with this inscription \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*To an Unknown God.\uc1\u8221* What, therefore, you worship in ignorance, that I am now proclaiming to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The God who made the world and all things that are in it \uc1\u8211* he, Lord as he is of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by hands,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}neither do human hands minister to his wants, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives, to all, life, and breath, and all things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He made all races of the earth\uc1\u8217*s surface \uc1\u8211* fixing a time for their rise and fall, and the limits of their settlements \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}That they might search for God, if by any means they might feel their way to him and find him. And yet he is not really far from any one of us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}for in him we live and move and are. To use the words of some of your own poets \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*His offspring, too, are we.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Therefore, as the offspring of God, we must not think that the Deity has any resemblance to anything made of gold, or silver, or stone \uc1\u8211* a work of human art and imagination.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}True, God looked with indulgence on the days of people\uc1\u8217*s ignorance, but now he is announcing to everyone everywhere the need for repentance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}because he has fixed a day on which he intends to judge the world with justice, by a man whom he has appointed \uc1\u8211* and of this he has given all people a pledge by raising this man from the dead.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}On hearing of a resurrection of the dead, some began jeering, but others said that they wanted to hear what he had to say about that another time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}And so Paul left the Court.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}There were, however, some people who joined him, and became believers in Christ. Among them were Dionysius, a member of the Court of Areopagus, a woman named Damaris, and several others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}On leaving Athens, Paul next went to Corinth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There he met a Jew of the name of Aquila, from Pontus, who, with his wife Priscilla, had lately come from Italy, in consequence of the order which had been issued by the Emperor Claudius for all Jews to leave Rome. Paul paid them a visit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and, since their trade was the same as his, he stayed and worked with them \uc1\u8211* their trade was tent-making.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Every Sabbath Paul gave addresses in the synagogue, trying to convince both Jews and Greeks.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But, when Silas and Timothy had come down from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself entirely to delivering the message, earnestly maintaining before the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}However, as they set themselves against him and became abusive, Paul shook his clothes in protest and said to them, \uc1\u8216*Your blood be on your own heads. My conscience is clear. From this time forward I will go to the Gentiles.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So he left, and went to the house of a certain Titius Justus, who had been accustomed to join in the worship of God, and whose house was next door to the synagogue.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Crispus, the synagogue leader, came to believe in the Lord, and so did all his household; and many of the Corinthians, as they listened to Paul, became believers in Christ and were baptized.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}One night the Lord said to Paul, in a vision, \uc1\u8216*Have no fear, but continue to speak, and refuse to be silenced;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for I am with you, and no one will do you harm, for I have many people in this city.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So he settled there for a year and a half, and taught God\uc1\u8217*s message among the people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}While Gallio was governor of Greece, some of the Jewish leaders made a combined attack on Paul, and brought him before the Governor\uc1\u8217*s Bench,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}charging him with persuading people to worship God in a way forbidden by the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Just as Paul was on the point of speaking, Gallio said to them, \uc1\u8216*If this were a case of misdemeanour or some serious crime, there would be some reason for my listening patiently to you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but, since it is a dispute about words, and names, and your own Law, you must see to it yourselves. I do not choose to be a judge in such matters.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Saying this, he drove them back from the Bench.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then they all set on Sosthenes, the synagogue leader, and beat him in front of the Bench, but Gallio did not trouble himself about any of these things.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Paul remained there some time after this, and then took leave of the followers, and sailed to Syria with Priscilla and Aquila, but not before his head had been shaved at Cenchreae, because he was under a vow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They put into Ephesus, and there Paul, leaving his companions, went into the synagogue and addressed the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When they asked him to prolong his stay, he declined, saying however,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}as he took his leave, \uc1\u8216*I will come back again to you, please God,\uc1\u8217* and then set sail from Ephesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}On reaching Caesarea, he went up to Jerusalem and exchanged greetings with the church, and then went down to Antioch.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}After making some stay in Antioch, he set out on a tour through the Phrygian district of Galatia, strengthening the faith of all the disciples as he went.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Meanwhile there had come to Ephesus an Alexandrian Jew, named Apollos, an eloquent man, who was well-versed in the scriptures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He had been well-instructed in the Way of the Lord, and with burning zeal he spoke of, and taught carefully, the facts about Jesus, though he knew of no baptism but John\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}This man began to speak out fearlessly in the synagogue; and when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him home and explained the Way of God to him more carefully still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}When he wanted to cross to Greece, the followers furthered his plans, and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. On his arrival he proved of great assistance to those who had, through the loving kindness of God, become believers in Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}for he vigorously confuted the Jews, publicly proving by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul passed through the inland districts of Roman Asia, and went to Ephesus. There he found some disciples, of whom he asked,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*Did you, when you became believers in Christ, receive the Holy Spirit?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* they answered, \uc1\u8216*we did not even hear that there was a Holy Spirit.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*What then was your baptism?\uc1\u8217* Paul asked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}\uc1\u8216*John\uc1\u8217*s baptism was a baptism on repentance,\uc1\u8217* rejoined Paul, \uc1\u8216*and John told the people (speaking of the \uc1\u8220*one coming\uc1\u8221* after him) that they should believe in him \uc1\u8211* that is in Jesus.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and, after Paul had placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit descended on them, and they began to speak in other languages and to preach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}There were about twelve of them in all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Paul went to the synagogue there, and for three months spoke out fearlessly, giving addresses and trying to convince his hearers, about the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Some of them, however, hardened their hearts and refused to believe, denouncing the Way before the people. So Paul left them and withdrew his disciples, and gave daily addresses in the lecture-hall of Tyrannus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This went on for two years, so that all who lived in Roman Asia, Jews and Greeks alike, heard the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}God did miracles of no ordinary kind by Paul\uc1\u8217*s hands;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so that people would carry home to the sick handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his body, and their diseases would leave them and the wicked spirits go out of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}An attempt was made by some itinerant Jews, who were exorcists, to use the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had wicked spirits in them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*I order you,\uc1\u8217* they would say, \uc1\u8216*by the Jesus, whom Paul preaches.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but the wicked spirit answered them, \uc1\u8216*Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but you \uc1\u8211* who are you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Then the man, in whom this wicked spirit was, sprang on them, mastered both of them, and so completely overpowered them, that they fled out of the house, stripped of their clothes, and wounded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This incident came to the knowledge of all the Jews and Greeks living at Ephesus; they were all awe-struck, and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in the highest honour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Many, too, of those who had become believers in Christ came with a full confession of their practices;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}while a number of people, who had practiced magic, collected their books and burnt them publicly; and on reckoning up the price of these, they found it amounted to fifty thousand silver coins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}So irresistibly did the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message spread and prevail.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Sometime after these events Paul resolved to go through Macedonia and Greece, and then make his way to Jerusalem. \uc1\u8216*And after I have been there,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*I must visit Rome also.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}So he sent to Macedonia two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, while he himself stayed for some time longer in Roman Asia.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Just about that time a great disturbance arose about the Way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}A silversmith named Demetrius, who made silver models of the shrine of Artemis, and so gave a great deal of work to the artisans,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}got these men together, as well as the workmen engaged in similar occupations, and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Men, you know that our prosperity depends on this work,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and you see and hear that not only at Ephesus, but in almost the whole of Roman Asia, this Paul has convinced and won over great numbers of people, by his assertion that those Gods which are made by hands are not Gods at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So that not only is this business of ours likely to fall into discredit, but there is the further danger that the Temple of the great Goddess Artemis will be thought nothing of, and that she herself will be deprived of her splendour \uc1\u8211* though all Roman Asia and the whole world worship her.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When they heard this, the men were greatly enraged, and began shouting \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The commotion spread through the whole city, and the people rushed together into the amphitheater, dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus, two Macedonians who were Paul\uc1\u8217*s traveling companions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Paul wished to go into the amphitheater and face the people, but the disciples would not let him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}while some of the chief religious officials of the province, who were friendly to him, sent repeated entreaties to him not to trust himself inside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Meanwhile some were shouting one thing and some another, for the Assembly was all in confusion, most of those present not even knowing why they had met.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}But some of the crowd prompted Alexander, whom several of the Jewish leaders had pushed to the front, and he waved his hand to show that he wanted to speak in their defence to the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}However, when they recognised him as a Jew, one cry broke from them all, and they continued shouting for two hours \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When the Recorder had succeeded in quieting the crowd, he said, \uc1\u8216*People of Ephesus, who is there, I ask you, who needs to be told that this city of Ephesus is the Warden of the Temple of the great Artemis, and of the statue which fell down from Zeus?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}As these are undeniable facts, you ought to keep calm and do nothing rash;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}for you have brought these men here, though they are neither robbers of Temples nor blasphemers of our Goddess.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}If, however, Demetrius and the artisans who are acting with him have a charge to make against anyone, there are court days and there are Magistrates; let both parties take legal proceedings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But if you want anything more, it will have to be settled in the regular Assembly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}For I tell you that we are in danger of being proceeded against for today\uc1\u8217*s riot, there being nothing to account for it; and in that case we will be at a loss to give any reason for this disorderly gathering.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}With these words he dismissed the Assembly.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}When the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, and, with encouraging words, bade them goodbye, and started on his journey to Macedonia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}After going through those districts and speaking many encouraging words to the disciples, he went into Greece, where he stayed three months.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He was about to sail to Syria, when he learned that a plot had been laid against him by several of the Jewish leaders; so he decided to return by way of Macedonia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He was accompanied by Sopater the son of Pyrrhus, of Beroea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, as well as by Tychicus and Trophimus of Roman Asia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}These people went to Troas and waited for us there;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}while we ourselves sailed from Philippi after the Passover, and joined them five days later at Troas, where we stayed for a week.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On the first day of the week, when we had met for the breaking of bread, Paul, who was intending to leave the next day, began to address those who were present, and prolonged his address until midnight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}There were a good many lamps in the upstairs room, where we had met;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and a young man named Eutychus, sitting at the window, was gradually overcome with great drowsiness, as Paul continued his address. At last, quite overpowered by his drowsiness, he fell from the third story to the ground, and was picked up for dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But Paul went down, threw himself on him, and put his arms round him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Do not be alarmed,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*he is still alive.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then he went upstairs; and, after breaking and partaking of the bread, he talked with them at great length until daybreak, and then left.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Meanwhile they had taken the lad away alive, and were greatly comforted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}We started first, went on board ship, and sailed for Assos, intending to take Paul on board there. This was by his own arrangement, as he intended to go by land himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and went on to Mitylene.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The day after we had sailed from there, we arrived off Chios, touched at Samos the following day, and the next day reached Miletus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}for Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus, so as to avoid spending much time in Roman Asia. He was making haste to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the Festival at the close of the Harvest.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}From Miletus, however, he sent to Ephesus and invited the church elders to meet him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and, when they came, he said to them, \uc1\u8216*You know well the life that I always led among you from the very first day that I set foot in Roman Asia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}serving the Lord, as I did, in all humility, amid the tears and trials which fell to my lot through the plots of some of the Jewish leaders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I never shrank from telling you anything that could be helpful to you, or from teaching you both in public and in private.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I earnestly pointed both Jews and Greeks to the repentance that leads to God, and to faith in Jesus, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And now, under spiritual constraint, I am here on my way to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}except that in town after town the Holy Spirit plainly declares to me that imprisonment and troubles await me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But I count my life of no value to myself, if only I may complete the course marked out for me, and the task that was allotted me by the Lord Jesus \uc1\u8211* which was to declare the good news of the love of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And now, I tell you, I know that none of you will ever see my face again \uc1\u8211* you among whom I have gone about proclaiming the kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Therefore I declare to you this day, that my conscience is clear in regard to the fate of any of you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}for I have not shrunk from announcing the whole purpose of God regarding you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Be watchful over yourselves, and over the whole flock, of which the Holy Spirit has placed you in charge, to shepherd the church of God, which he won for himself at the cost of his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I know that, after my departure, merciless wolves will get in among you, who will not spare the flock;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}and from among yourselves, too, people will arise, who will teach perversions of truth, so as to draw away the disciples after them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Therefore, be on your guard, remembering how for three years, night and day, I never ceased, even with tears, to warn each one of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And now I commend you to the Lord and to the message of his love \uc1\u8211* a message which has the power to build up your characters, and to give you your place among all those who have become Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}I have never coveted anyone\uc1\u8217*s gold or silver or clothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}You, yourselves, know that these hands of mine provided not only for my own wants, but for my companions also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}I left nothing undone to show you that, labouring as I laboured, you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said himself \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*It is more blessed to give than to receive.\uc1\u8221*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}When Paul had finished speaking, he knelt down and prayed with them all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}All were in tears; and throwing their arms round Paul\uc1\u8217*s neck, they kissed him again and again,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}grieving most of all over what he had said \uc1\u8211* that they would never see his face again. Then they escorted him to the ship.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}When we had torn ourselves away and had set sail, we ran before the wind to Cos; the next day we came to Rhodes, and from there to Patara,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}where we found a ship crossing to Phoenicia, and went on board and set sail.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}After sighting Cyprus and leaving it on the left, we sailed to Syria, and put into Tyre, where the ship was to discharge her cargo.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}There we found the disciples and stayed a week with them. Speaking under the influence of the Spirit, they warned Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}However, when we had come to the end of our visit, we went on our way, all the disciples with their wives and children escorting us out of the city. We knelt down on the beach, and prayed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and then said goodbye to one another; after which we went on board, and they returned home.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After we had made the run from Tyre, we landed at Ptolemais, and exchanged greetings with the followers there, and spent a day with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The next day we left, and reached Caesarea, where we went to the house of Philip, the missionary, who was one of the Seven, and stayed with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}He had four unmarried daughters, who had the gift of prophecy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}During our visit, which lasted several days, a prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He came to see us, and, taking Paul\uc1\u8217*s belt, and binding his own feet and hands with it, said, \uc1\u8216*This is what the Holy Spirit says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The man to whom this belt belongs will be bound like this by the religious authorities in Jerusalem, and they will give him up to the Gentiles\uc1\u8221*.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When we heard that, we and the people of the place began to entreat Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It was then that Paul made the reply, \uc1\u8216*Why are you weeping and breaking my heart like this? For my part, I am ready not only to be bound, but even to suffer death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, as he would not be persuaded, we said no more to him, only adding \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*The Lord\uc1\u8217*s will be done.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}At the end of our visit, we made our preparations, and started on our way up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, and brought Mnason with them, a Cypriot disciple of long standing, with whom we were to stay.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}On our arrival at Jerusalem, the followers of the Lord there gave us a hearty welcome;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and the next day Paul went with us to see James, and all the church elders were present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After greeting them, Paul related in detail all that God had done among the Gentiles through his efforts;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and, when they had heard it, they began praising God, and said to Paul:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*You see, brother, that those of our people who have become believers in Christ may be numbered by tens of thousands, and they are all naturally earnest in upholding the Jewish Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Now they have heard it said about you, that you teach all of our people in foreign countries to forsake Moses, for you tell them not to circumcise their children or even to observe Jewish customs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Well now, as they are certain to hear of your arrival, do what we are going to suggest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}We have four men here, who have of their own accord put themselves under a vow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Join these men, share their purification, and bear their expenses, so that they may shave their heads; and then all will see that there is no truth in what they have been told about you, but that, on the contrary, you yourself rule your life in obedience to the Jewish Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}As to the Gentiles who have become believers in Christ, we have sent our decision that they should avoid food offered to idols, and blood, and the flesh of strangled animals, and impurity.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Paul joined the men, and the next day shared their purification, and went into the Temple, and gave notice of the expiration of the period of purification when the usual offering should have been made on behalf of each of them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But, just as the seven days were drawing to a close, some of the Jewish people from Roman Asia caught sight of Paul in the Temple, and caused great excitement among all the people present, by seizing Paul and shouting,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*People of Israel! Help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people, our Law, and this place; and, what is more, he has actually brought Greeks into the Temple and defiled this sacred place.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}(For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in Paul\uc1\u8217*s company in the city, and were under the belief that Paul had taken him into the Temple.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The whole city was stirred, and the people quickly collected, seized Paul, and dragged him out of the Temple, when the doors were immediately shut.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}They were bent on killing him, when it was reported to the officer commanding the garrison, that all Jerusalem was in commotion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}He instantly got together some officers and soldiers, and charged down on the crowd, who, when they saw the commanding officer and his soldiers, stopped beating Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Then he went up to Paul, arrested him, ordered him to be doubly chained, and proceeded to inquire who he was, and what he had been doing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Some of the crowd said one thing, and some another; and, as he could get no definite reply because of the uproar, he ordered Paul to be taken into the barracks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}When Paul reached the steps, he was actually being carried by the soldiers, owing to the violence of the mob;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}for the people were following in a mass, shouting out, \uc1\u8216*Kill him!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Just as he was about to be taken into the Fort, Paul said to the commanding officer, \uc1\u8216*May I speak to you?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Do you know Greek?\uc1\u8217* asked the commanding officer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}\uc1\u8216*Aren\uc1\u8217*t you, then, the Egyptian who some time ago raised an insurrection and led the four thousand Bandits out into the wilderness?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}\uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* said Paul, \uc1\u8216*I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of a city of some note. I beg you to give me permission to speak to the people.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}The commanding officer gave his permission, and Paul, standing on the steps, made signs with his hand to the people, and, when comparative silence had been obtained, he said to them in Hebrew:{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}\uc1\u8216*Brothers and fathers, listen to the defence which I am about to make.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}When they heard that he was speaking to them in Hebrew, they were still more quiet; and Paul went on:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, but I was brought up in this city under the teaching of Gamaliel, and educated in accordance with the strict system of our ancestral Law. I was as zealous in God\uc1\u8217*s service as any of you who are here today.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In my persecution of this Way I did not stop even at the taking of life. I put in chains, and imprisoned, men and women alike \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And to that the high priest himself and all the council of elders can testify. For I had letters of introduction from them to our fellow Jews at Damascus, and I was on my way to that place, to bring those whom I might find there prisoners to Jerusalem for punishment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}While I was still on my way, just as I was getting close to Damascus, about midday, suddenly there flashed from the heavens a great light all round me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me \uc1\u8220*Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*Who are you, Lord?\uc1\u8221* I replied. Then the voice said \uc1\u8220*I am Jesus of Nazareth whom you are persecuting.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The men with me saw the light, but did not hear the speaker\uc1\u8217*s voice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then I said \uc1\u8220*What am I to do, Lord?\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8220*Get up and go into Damascus,\uc1\u8221* The Lord said to me, \uc1\u8220*and there you will be told all that you have been appointed to do.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In consequence of that dazzling light I could not see, but my companions held me by the hand, until I reached Damascus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}There a man named Ananias, a strict observer of our Law, well spoken of by all the Jewish inhabitants, came to see me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Standing close to me, he said \uc1\u8220*Saul, my brother, recover your sight.\uc1\u8221* And then and there I recovered my sight and looked up at him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then he said \uc1\u8220*The God of our ancestors has appointed you to learn his will, and to see the righteous one, and to hear words from his lips;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for you will be a witness for him to all the world of what you have just seen and heard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And now why wait any longer, Be baptized at once, wash away your sins, and invoke his name.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}After my return to Jerusalem, while I was praying one day in the Temple, I fell into a trance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and saw Jesus saying to me \uc1\u8220*Make haste and leave Jerusalem at once, because they will not accept your testimony about me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}\uc1\u8220*Lord,\uc1\u8221* I answered, \uc1\u8220*these people know that I used to imprison and scourge, in synagogue after synagogue, those who believed in you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and, when the blood of your martyr, Stephen, was being shed, I was myself standing by, approving of his death, and took charge of the clothes of those who were murdering him.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But Jesus said to me \uc1\u8220*Go; for I will send you to the Gentiles far away\uc1\u8221*.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Up to this point the people had been listening to Paul, but at these words they called out, \uc1\u8216*Kill him! A fellow like this ought not to have been allowed to live!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}As they were shouting, tearing off their clothes, and throwing dust in the air,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}the commanding officer ordered Paul to be taken into the Fort, and directed that he should be examined under the lash so that he might find out the reason for their outcry against him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But just as they had tied him up to be scourged, Paul said to the centurion standing near, \uc1\u8216*Is it legal for you to scourge a Roman citizen, unconvicted?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}On hearing this, the centurion went and reported it to the commanding officer. \uc1\u8216*Do you know what you are doing?\uc1\u8217* he said. \uc1\u8216*This man is a Roman citizen.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}So the commanding officer went up to Paul and said, \uc1\u8216*Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* replied Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}\uc1\u8216*I had to pay a heavy price for my position as citizen,\uc1\u8217* said the officer. \uc1\u8216*I am one by birth,\uc1\u8217* rejoined Paul.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}The men who were to have examined Paul immediately drew back, and the officer, finding that Paul was a Roman citizen, was alarmed at having put him in chains.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}On the next day the commanding officer, wishing to find out the real reason why Paul was denounced by the Jewish leaders, had his chains taken off, and directed the chief priests and the whole of the High Council to assemble, and then took Paul down and brought him before them.{\cf1\f1\fs22 23}Paul fixed his eyes on the Council, and began:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Brothers, for my part, I have always ordered my life before God, with a clear conscience, up to this very day.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}At this, the high priest Ananias ordered the men standing near to strike him on the mouth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Paul turned to him and said:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Are you sitting there to try me in accordance with law, and yet, in defiance of law, order me to be struck?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The people standing near said to Paul, \uc1\u8216*Do you know that you are insulting God\uc1\u8217*s high priest?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*I did not know, brothers, that it was the high priest,\uc1\u8217* said Paul, \uc1\u8216*for scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Of the ruler of your people you should speak no ill\uc1\u8221*.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Noticing that some of those present were Sadducees and others Pharisees, Paul called out in the Council, \uc1\u8216*Brothers, I am a Pharisee and a son of Pharisees. It is on the question of hope for the dead and of their resurrection that I am on my trial.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As soon as he said this, a dispute arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees; and there was a sharp division of opinion among those present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}(For Sadducees say there is no such thing as a resurrection, and that there is neither angel nor spirit, while Pharisees believe in both.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So a great uproar ensued, and some of the Teachers of the Law belonging to the Pharisees\uc1\u8217* party stood up and hotly protested, \uc1\u8216*We find nothing whatever wrong in this man. Suppose a spirit did speak to him, or an angel\uc1\u8230*\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The dispute was becoming so violent, that the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces between them, ordered the Guard to go down and rescue him from them, and take him into the Fort.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}That night the Lord came and stood by Paul, and said, \uc1\u8216*Courage! You have borne witness for me in Jerusalem and you must bear witness in Rome also.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In the morning some Jewish men combined together, and took an oath that they would not eat or drink until they had killed Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There were more than forty in the plot;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and they went to the chief priests and the elders, and said, \uc1\u8216*We have taken a solemn oath not to touch food until we have killed Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So we want you now, with the consent of the Council, to suggest to the commanding officer that he should bring Paul down before you, as though you intended to go more fully into his case; but, before he comes here, we will be ready to make away with him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}However, the son of Paul\uc1\u8217*s sister, hearing of the plot, went to the Fort, and on being admitted, told Paul about it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Paul called one of the garrison centurion and asked him to take the lad to the commanding officer, as he had something to tell him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The centurion went with the lad to the commanding officer, and said, \uc1\u8216*The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this lad to you, as he has something to tell you.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The commanding officer took the lad by the hand, and, stepping aside, asked what it was he had to tell him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}\uc1\u8216*Some men have agreed,\uc1\u8217* answered the lad, \uc1\u8216*to ask you to bring Paul down before the Council tomorrow, on the plea of your making further inquiry into his case.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But do not let them persuade you, for more than forty of them are lying in wait for him, who have taken an oath that they will not eat or drink, until they have made away with him; and they are at this very moment in readiness, counting on your promise.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}The commanding officer then dismissed the lad, cautioning him not to mention to anybody that he had given him that information.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Then he called two Captains, and ordered them to have two hundred soldiers ready to go to Caesarea, as well as seventy troopers and two hundred lancers, by nine o\uc1\u8217*clock that night,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and to have horses ready for Paul to ride, so that they might take him safely to Felix, the Governor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He also wrote a letter along these lines:
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}\uc1\u8220*Claudius Lysias sends his compliments to His Excellency Felix the Governor.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}The man whom I send with this had been seized by some Jews, and was on the point of being killed by them, when I came upon them with the force under my command, and rescued him, as I learned that he was a Roman citizen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Wanting to know exactly the ground of the charges they made against him, I brought him before their Council,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}when I found that their charges were connected with questions of their own Law, and that there was nothing alleged involving either death or imprisonment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Having, however, information of a plot against the man, which was about to be put into execution, I am sending him to you at once, and I have also directed his accusers to prosecute him before you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The soldiers, in accordance with their orders, took charge of Paul and conducted him by night to Antipatris;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and on the next day, leaving the troopers to go on with him, they returned to the Fort.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}On arriving at Caesarea, the troopers delivered the letter to the Governor, and brought Paul before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}As soon as Felix had read the letter, he enquired to what province Paul belonged, and, learning that he came from Cilicia, he said,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}\uc1\u8216*I will hear all you have to say as soon as your accusers have arrived.\uc1\u8217* And he ordered Paul to be kept under guard in Herod\uc1\u8217*s Government house.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 24}Five days afterwards the high priest Ananias came down with some of the elders and a barrister named Tertullus. They laid an information with the Governor against Paul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and, when the hearing came on, Tertullus began his speech for the prosecution.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8216*We owe it to your Excellency,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*that we are enjoying profound peace, and we owe it to your foresight that this nation is constantly securing reforms \uc1\u8211* advantages which we very gratefully accept at all times and places.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But \uc1\u8211* not to be tedious \uc1\u8211* I beg you, with your accustomed fairness, to listen to a brief statement of our case.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}We have found this man a public pest; he is one who stirs up disputes among our people all the world over, and is a ringleader of the Nazarene heretics.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He even attempted to desecrate the Temple itself, but we caught him;{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}  Some later manuscripts add: We wanted to judge him according to our law. But Lysias the commanding officer came and took him out of our hands by force, ordering his accusers to come before you. }{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and you will be able, by examining him on all these points, to satisfy yourself as to the charges which we are bringing against him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The Jewish crowd also joined in the attack and bore out his statements.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}On a sign from the Governor, Paul made this reply:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*Knowing, as I do, for how many years you have acted as judge to this nation, it is with confidence that I undertake my own defence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For you can easily verify that it is not more than twelve days ago that I went up to worship at Jerusalem,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}where my prosecutors never found me holding discussions with anyone, or causing a crowd to collect \uc1\u8211* either in the Temple, or in the synagogues, or about the city;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and they cannot establish the charges which they are now making against me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}This, however, I do acknowledge to you, that it is as a believer in the Way which they call heretical, that I worship the God of my ancestors. At the same time, I believe everything that is in accordance with the Law and that is written in the prophets;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and I have a hope that rests in God \uc1\u8211* a hope which they also cherish \uc1\u8211* that there will one day be a resurrection of good and bad alike.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This being so, I strive at all times to keep my conscience clear before both God and people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}After some years\uc1\u8217* absence I had come to bring charitable gifts to my nation, and to make offerings;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and it was while engaged in this that they found me in the Temple, after completing a period of purification, but not with any crowd or disorder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}There were, however, some Jews from Roman Asia who ought to have been here before you, and to have made any charge that they may have against me \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Or else let my opponents here say what they found wrong in me when I was before the Council,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}except as to the one sentence that I shouted out as I stood among them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*It is about the resurrection of the dead that I am on my trial before you today\uc1\u8221*.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Felix, however, adjourned the case \uc1\u8211* though he had a fairly accurate knowledge of all that concerned the Way \uc1\u8211* with the promise, \uc1\u8216*When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will give my decision in your case.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So he gave orders to the centurion in charge of Paul to keep him in custody, but to relax the regulations, and not to prevent any of his personal friends from attending to his wants.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Some days later Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, and, sending for Paul, listened to what he had to say about faith in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But, while Paul was speaking at length about righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became terrified, and interrupted him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Go for the present, but, when I find an opportunity, I will send for you again.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}He was hoping, too, for a bribe from Paul, and so he used to send for him frequently and talk with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}But, after the lapse of two years, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and, wishing to gain popularity with the Jewish leaders, he left Paul a prisoner.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 25}Three days after Festus had arrived in his province, he left Caesarea and went up to Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There the chief priests and the leading men among the Jews laid an information before him against Paul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and asked a favour of him, to Paul\uc1\u8217*s injury \uc1\u8211* to have Paul brought to Jerusalem. All the while they were plotting to make away with him on the road.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But Festus answered that Paul was in prison at Caesarea, and that he himself would be leaving for that place shortly.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}\uc1\u8216*So let the influential men among you,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*go down with me, and if there is anything amiss in the man, charge him formally with it.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After staying among them some eight or ten days, Festus went down to Caesarea. The next day he took his seat on the Bench, and ordered Paul to be brought before him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On Paul\uc1\u8217*s appearance, the Jewish leaders who had come down from Jerusalem surrounded him, and made many serious charges, which they failed to establish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Paul\uc1\u8217*s answer to the charge was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I have not committed any offence against the Jewish Law, or the Temple, or the Emperor.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But, as Festus wished to gain popularity with the Jews, he interrupted Paul with the question, \uc1\u8216*Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be tried on these charges before me there?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*No,\uc1\u8217* replied Paul, \uc1\u8216*I am standing at the Emperor\uc1\u8217*s court, where I ought to be tried. I have not wronged the Jews, as you yourself are well aware.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If, however, I am breaking the law and have committed any offence deserving death, I do not ask to escape the penalty; but, if there is nothing in the accusations of these people, no one has the power to give me up to them. I appeal to the Emperor.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Festus, after conferring with his Council, answered, \uc1\u8216*You have appealed to the Emperor; to the Emperor you will go.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Some days later King Agrippa and Bernice came down to Caesarea, and paid a visit of congratulation to Festus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and, as they were staying there for several days, Festus laid Paul\uc1\u8217*s case before the king. \uc1\u8216*There is a man here,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*left a prisoner by Felix,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}about whom, when I came to Jerusalem, the Jewish chief priest and the elders laid an information, demanding judgment against him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}My answer to them was, that it was not the practice of Romans to give up anyone to their accusers until the accused had met them face to face, and had also had an opportunity of answering the charges brought against them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}So they met here, and without loss of time I took my seat on the Bench the very next day, and ordered the man to be brought before me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But, when his accusers came forward, they brought no charge of wrongdoing such as I had expected;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}but I found that there were certain questions in dispute between them about their own religion, and about some dead man called Jesus, whom Paul declared to be alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And, as I was at a loss how to enquire into questions of this kind, I asked Paul if he were willing to go up to Jerusalem, and be put on trial there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Paul, however, appealed to have his case reserved for the consideration of his August Majesty, so I ordered him to be detained in custody, until I could send him to the Emperor.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}\uc1\u8216*I should like to hear this man myself,\uc1\u8217* Agrippa said to Festus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*You will hear him tomorrow,\uc1\u8217* Festus answered.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come in full state and had entered the Audience Chamber, with the superior officers and the principal people of the city, by the order of Festus Paul was brought before them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then Festus said, \uc1\u8216*King Agrippa, and all here present, you see before you the man about whom the whole Jewish people have applied to me, both at Jerusalem and here, loudly asserting that he ought not to be allowed to live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}I found, however, that he had not done anything deserving death; so, as he had himself appealed to his August Majesty, I decided to send him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But I have nothing definite to write about him to my Imperial Master; and for that reason I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examining him, I may have something to write.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For it seems to me absurd to send a prisoner, without at the same time stating the charges made against him.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 26}Turning to Paul, Agrippa said, \uc1\u8216*You are at liberty to speak for yourself.\uc1\u8217* Then Paul stretched out his hand and began his defence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8216*I have been congratulating myself, King Agrippa,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*that it is before you that I have to make my defence today, with regard to all the charges brought against me by my own people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}especially as you are so well-versed in all the customs and questions of the Jewish world. I beg you therefore to give me a patient hearing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My life, then, from youth upwards, was passed, from the very first, among my own nation, and in Jerusalem, and is within the knowledge of all Jews;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and they have always known \uc1\u8211* if they choose to give evidence \uc1\u8211* that, in accordance with the very strictest form of our religion, I lived a true Pharisee.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Even now, it is because of my hope in the promise given by God to our ancestors that I stand here on my trial \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A promise which our twelve tribes, by earnest service night and day, hope to see fulfilled. It is for this hope, your Majesty, that I am accused \uc1\u8211* and by Jews themselves!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Why do you all hold it incredible that God should raise the dead?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I myself, it is true, once thought it my duty to oppose in every way the name of Jesus of Nazareth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and I actually did so at Jerusalem. Acting on the authority of the chief priests, I myself threw many of the people of Christ into prison, and, when it was proposed to put them to death, I gave my vote for it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Time after time, in every synagogue, I tried by punishments to force them to blaspheme. So frantic was I against them, that I pursued them even to towns beyond our borders.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}It was while I was traveling to Damascus on an errand of this kind, entrusted with full powers by the chief priests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}that at midday, your Majesty, I saw right in my path, coming from the heavens, a light brighter than the glare of the sun, which shone all round me and those traveling with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We all fell to the ground, and then I heard a voice saying to me in Hebrew \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? By kicking against the goad you are punishing yourself.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*Who are you, Lord?\uc1\u8221* I asked. And the Lord said, \uc1\u8220*I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}but get up and stand upright; for I have appeared to you in order to appoint you a servant and a witness of those revelations of me which you have already had, and of those in which I will yet appear to you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}since I am choosing you out from your own people and from the Gentiles, to whom I now send you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; so that they may receive pardon for their sins, and a place among those who have become God\uc1\u8217*s people, by faith in me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}After that, King Agrippa, I did not fail to obey the heavenly vision;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}on the contrary, first to those at Damascus and Jerusalem, and then through the whole of Judea, and to the Gentiles as well, I began to preach repentance and conversion to God, and a life befitting that repentance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}This is why some men seized me in the Temple, and made attempts on my life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}However I have received help from God to this very day, and so stand here, and bear my testimony to high and low alike \uc1\u8211* without adding a word to what the prophets, as well as Moses, declared should happen \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}That the Christ must suffer, and that, by rising from the dead, he was destined to be the first to bring news of light, not only to our nation, but also to the Gentiles.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}While Paul was making this defence, Festus called out loudly, \uc1\u8216*You are mad, Paul; your great learning is driving you mad.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}\uc1\u8216*I am not mad, your Excellency,\uc1\u8217* he replied. \uc1\u8216*On the contrary, the statements that I am making are true and sober.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Indeed, the king knows about these matters, so I speak before him without constraint. I am sure that there is nothing whatever of what I have been telling him that has escaped his attention; for all this has not been done in a corner.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But Agrippa said to Paul, \uc1\u8216*You are soon trying to make a Christian of me!\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}\uc1\u8216*Whether it is soon or late,\uc1\u8217* answered Paul, \uc1\u8216*I pray to God that not only you, but all who are listening to me, might today become just what I am myself \uc1\u8211* except for these chains!\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Then the king rose, with the Governor and Bernice and those who had been sitting with them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and, after retiring, discussed the case among themselves. \uc1\u8216*There is nothing,\uc1\u8217* they said, \uc1\u8216*deserving death or imprisonment in this man\uc1\u8217*s conduct\uc1\u8217*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}and, speaking to Festus, Agrippa added, \uc1\u8216*The man might have been discharged, if he had not appealed to the Emperor.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 27}As it was decided that we were to sail to Italy, Paul and some other prisoners were put in charge of a centurion of the Augustan Guard, named Julius.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}We went on board a ship from Adramyttium, which was on the point of sailing to the ports along the coast of Roman Asia, and put to sea. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, went with us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The next day we put in to Sidon, where Julius treated Paul in a friendly manner, and allowed him to go to see his friends and receive their hospitality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Putting to sea again, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the wind was against us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, after crossing the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we reached Myra in Lycia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There the Roman officer found an Alexandrian ship on her way to Italy, and put us on board of her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For several days our progress was slow, and it was only with difficulty that we arrived off Cnidus. As the wind was still unfavourable when we came off Cape Salmone, we sailed under the lee of Crete,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and with difficulty, by keeping close in shore, we reached a place called \uc1\u8220*Fair Havens,\uc1\u8221* near which was the town of Lasea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This had taken a considerable time, and sailing was already dangerous, for the Fast was already over; and so Paul gave this warning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*My friends,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*I see that this voyage will be attended with injury and much damage, not only to the cargo and the ship, but to our own lives also.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The Roman officer, however, was more influenced by the captain and the owner than by what was said by Paul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And, as the harbour was not a suitable one to winter in, the majority were in favour of continuing the voyage, in hope of being able to reach Phoenix, and winter there. Phoenix was a Cretan harbour, open to the north-east and south-east.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}So, when a light wind sprang up from the south, thinking that they had found their opportunity, they weighed anchor and kept along the coast of Crete, close in shore.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But shortly afterwards a hurricane came down on us off the land \uc1\u8211* a north-easter, as it is called.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The ship was caught by it and was unable to keep her head to the wind, so we had to give way and let her drive before it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Running under the lee of a small island called Cauda, we only just managed to secure the ship\uc1\u8217*s boat,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, after hoisting it on board, the men frapped the ship. But, afraid of being driven on to the Syrtis Sands, they lowered the yard, and then drifted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So violently were we tossed about by the storm, that the next day they began throwing the cargo overboard,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and, on the following day, threw out the ship\uc1\u8217*s tackle with their own hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}As neither sun nor stars were visible for several days, and, as the gale still continued severe, all hope of our being saved was at last abandoned.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It was then, when they had gone a long time without food, that Paul came forward, and said, \uc1\u8216*My friends, you should have listened to me, and not have sailed from Crete and so incurred this injury and damage.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Yet, even as things are, I beg you not to lose courage, for there will not be a single life lost among you \uc1\u8211* only the ship.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong, and whom I serve, stood by me, and said \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}\uc1\u8220*Have no fear, Paul; you must appear before the Emperor, and God himself has given you the lives of all your fellow voyagers.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Therefore, courage, my friends! For I believe God, that everything will happen exactly as I have been told.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}We will, however, have to be driven on some island.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}It was now the fourteenth night of the storm, and we were drifting about in the Adriatic Sea, when, about midnight, the sailors began to suspect that they were drawing near land.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}So they took soundings, and found twenty fathoms of water. After waiting a little, they took soundings again, and found fifteen fathoms.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Then, as they were afraid of our being driven on some rocky coast, they let go four anchors from the stern, and longed for daylight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}The sailors wanted to leave the ship, and had lowered the boat, on pretence of running out anchors from the bows,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}when Paul said to the Roman officer and his men, \uc1\u8216*Unless the sailors remain on board, you cannot be saved.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}So the soldiers cut the ropes which held the boat, and let her drift away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}In the interval before daybreak Paul kept urging them all to take something to eat.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*It is a fortnight today,\uc1\u8217* he said, \uc1\u8216*that, owing to your anxiety, you have gone without food, taking nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}So I beg you to take something to eat; your safety depends on it, for not one of you will lose even a hair of his head.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}With these words he took some bread, and, after saying the thanksgiving to God before them all, broke it in pieces, and began to eat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}and the men all felt cheered and had something to eat themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}There were about seventy-six of us on board, all told.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}After satisfying their hunger, they further lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}When daylight came, they could not make out what land it was, but, observing a creek in which there was a beach, they consulted as to whether they could run the ship safely into it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Then they cast off, and abandoned the anchors, and at the same time unlashed the gear of the steering oars, hoisted the foresail to the wind, and made for the beach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}They got, however, into a kind of channel, and there ran the ship aground. The bows stuck fast and could not be moved, while the stern began breaking up under the strain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}The advice of the soldiers was that the prisoners should be killed, so that none of them could swim away and make their escape.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}But the Roman officer, anxious to save Paul, prevented their carrying out their intention, and ordered that those who could swim should be the first to jump into the sea and try to reach the shore;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}and that the rest should follow, some on planks, and others on different pieces of the ship. In these various ways everyone managed to get safely ashore.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 28}When we were all safe, we found that the island was called Malta.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The island\uc1\u8217*s people showed us marked kindness, for they lit a fire and took us all under shelter, because it had come on to rain and was cold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Paul had gathered a quantity of dry sticks and laid them on the fire, when a poisonous snake, driven out by the heat, fastened on his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When the islanders saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to one another, \uc1\u8216*Evidently this man is a murderer, for though he has been saved from the sea, Justice has not allowed him to live.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}However, Paul shook the creature off into the fire and took no harm.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The islanders were expecting inflammation to set in, or that he would suddenly fall dead; but, after waiting for a long time, and seeing that there was nothing amiss with him, they changed their minds and said that he was a God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In that region there was an estate belonging to the Governor of the island, whose name was Publius. He took us up to his house, and for three days entertained us most courteously.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It happened that the father of Publius was lying ill of fever and dysentery. So Paul went to see him; and, after praying, he placed his hands on him and cured him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After this, all the people in the island who had any illness came to Paul, and were cured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They also presented us with many gifts, and when we set sail they put supplies of necessaries on board.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}After three months, we set sail in a ship that had wintered in the island. She was an Alexandrian vessel, and had the Twin sons of Zeus for her figure-head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three days,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and from there we worked to windward and so got to Rhegium. A day later a south wind sprang up and took us to Puteoli in two days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}There we found some of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, and were urged to stay a week with them; after which we went on to Rome.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The followers there had heard about us, and came out as far as the Market of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. At sight of them Paul thanked God and was much cheered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}On our reaching Rome, Paul was allowed to live by himself, except for the soldier who was in charge of him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Three days after our arrival, Paul invited the leading Jews to meet him; and, when they came, he said, \uc1\u8216*Brothers, although I had done nothing hostile to the interests of our nation or to our ancestral customs, yet I was sent from Jerusalem as a prisoner, and handed over to the Romans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The Romans, when they had examined me, were ready to release me, because there was nothing in my conduct deserving death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But, as the Jewish leaders opposed my release, I was compelled to appeal to the Emperor \uc1\u8211* not, indeed, that I had any charge to make against my own nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}This, then, is my reason for urging you to come to see me and talk with me; because it is for the sake of the hope of Israel that I am here in chains.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}\uc1\u8216*We,\uc1\u8217* was their reply, \uc1\u8216*have not had any letter about you from Judea, nor have any of our fellow Jews come and reported or said anything bad about you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But we will be glad to hear from you what your views are, for, with regard to this sect, we are well aware that it is spoken against on all sides.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}They then fixed a day with him, and came to the place where he was staying, in even larger numbers, when Paul proceeded to lay the subject before them. He bore his testimony to the kingdom of God, and tried to convince them about Jesus, by arguments drawn from the Law of Moses and from the prophets \uc1\u8211* speaking from morning until evening.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Some were inclined to accept what he said; others, however, rejected it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}So, as they disagreed among themselves, they began to disperse, Paul adding only \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
\uc1\u8216*True, indeed, was the declaration made by the Holy Spirit, through the prophet Isaiah to your ancestors \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Go to this nation and say:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 You will hear with your ears without ever understanding,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and, though you have eyes, you will see without ever perceiving.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For the mind of this nation has grown dense,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and their ears are dull of hearing,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 their eyes also have they closed;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 otherwise some day they might see with their eyes,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and with their ears they might hear,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and in their mind they might understand, and might turn \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 and I might heal them.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Understand, then, that this salvation of God was sent for the Gentiles; and they will listen.\uc1\u8217*{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}  Some later manuscripts add: After he said these things the Jews left, all the while engaging in a heated debate among themselves. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For two whole years Paul stayed in a house which he rented for himself, welcoming all who came to see him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}proclaiming the kingdom of God, and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ, with perfect fearlessness, unhindered.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Romans (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Romans

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, who has been called to become an apostle, and has been set apart to tell God\uc1\u8217*s good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This good news God promised long ago through his prophets in the sacred scriptures,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}concerning his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord; who, as to his human nature, was descended from David,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}but, as to the spirit of holiness within him, was miraculously designated Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Through him we received the gift of the apostolic office, to win submission to the faith among all nations for the glory of his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And among these nations are you \uc1\u8211* you who have been called to belong to Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To all in Rome who are dear to God and have been called to become Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because the report of your faith is spreading throughout the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God, to whom I offer the worship of my soul as I tell the goodness of his Son, is my witness how constantly I mention you when I pray,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}asking that, if he be willing, I may some day at last find the way open to visit you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For I long to see you, in order to impart to you some spiritual gift and so give you fresh strength \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}or rather that both you and I may find encouragement in each other\uc1\u8217*s faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I want you to know, my friends, that I have many times intended coming to see you \uc1\u8211* but until now I have been prevented \uc1\u8211* that I might find among you some fruit of my labours, as I have already among the other nations.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Faith the Ground of Acceptance

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I have a duty to both the Greek and the barbarian, to both the cultured and the ignorant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And so, for my part, I am ready to tell the good news to you also who are in Rome.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is the power of God which brings salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first, but also to the Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For in it there is a revelation of the divine righteousness resulting from faith and leading on to faith; as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Through faith the righteous will find life.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So, too, there is a revelation from heaven of the divine wrath against every form of ungodliness and wickedness on the part of those people who, by their wicked lives, are stifling the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This is so, because what can be known about God is plain to them; for God himself has made it plain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For ever since the creation of the universe God\uc1\u8217*s invisible attributes \uc1\u8211* his everlasting power and divinity \uc1\u8211* are to be seen and studied in his works, so that people have no excuse;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}because, although they learned to know God, yet they did not offer him as God either praise or thanksgiving. Their speculations about him proved futile, and their undiscerning minds were darkened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Professing to be wise, they showed themselves fools;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and they transformed the glory of the immortal God into the likeness of mortal humans, and of birds, and beasts, and reptiles.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Therefore God abandoned them to impurity, letting them follow the cravings of their hearts, until they dishonoured their own bodies;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}for they had substituted a lie for the truth about God, and had reverenced and worshiped created things more than the Creator, who is to be praised for ever. Amen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}That, I say, is why God abandoned them to degrading passions. Even the women among them perverted the natural use of their bodies to the unnatural;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}while the men, disregarding that for which women were intended by nature, were consumed with passion for one another. Men indulged in vile practices with men, and incurred in their own persons the inevitable penalty for their perverseness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Then, as they would not keep God before their minds, God abandoned them to depraved thoughts, so that they did all kinds of shameful things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}They revelled in every form of wickedness, evil, greed, vice. Their lives were full of envy, murder, quarrelling, treachery, malice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}They became back-biters, slanderers, impious, insolent, boastful. They devised new sins. They disobeyed their parents.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}They were undiscerning, untrustworthy, without natural affection or pity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Well aware of God\uc1\u8217*s decree, that those who do such things deserve to die, not only are they guilty of them themselves, but they even applaud those who do them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Therefore you have nothing to say in your own defence, whoever you are who set yourself up as a judge. In judging others you condemn yourself, for you who set yourself up as a judge do the very same things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And we know that God\uc1\u8217*s judgment falls unerringly on those who do them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You who judge those that do such things and yet are yourself guilty of them \uc1\u8211* do you suppose that you of all people will escape God\uc1\u8217*s judgment?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Or do you think lightly of his abundant kindness, patience, and forbearance, not realising that his kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Hard-hearted and impenitent as you are, you are storing up for yourself wrath on the day of wrath, when God\uc1\u8217*s justice as a judge will be revealed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for he will give to everyone what their actions deserve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To those who, by perseverance in doing good, aim at glory, honour, and all that is imperishable, he will give immortal life;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}while as to those who are factious, and disobedient to truth but obedient to evil, wrath and anger, distress and despair,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}will fall on every human being who persists in wrongdoing \uc1\u8211* on the Jew first, but also on the Greek.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But there will be glory, honour, and peace for everyone who does right \uc1\u8211* for the Jew first, but also for the Greek,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}since God shows no partiality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}All who, when they sin, are without Law will also perish without Law; while all who, when they sin, are under Law, will be judged as being under Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It is not those who hear the words of a Law that are righteous before God, but it is those who obey it that will be pronounced righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}When Gentiles, who have no Law, do instinctively what the Law requires, they, though they have no Law, are a Law to themselves;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}for they show the demands of the Law written on their hearts; their consciences corroborating it, while in their thoughts they argue either in self-accusation or, it may be, in self-defence \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}on the day when God passes judgment on people\uc1\u8217*s inmost lives, as the good news that I tell declares that he will do through Christ Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But, perhaps, you bear the name of \uc1\u8220*Jew,\uc1\u8221* and are relying on Law, and boast of belonging to God, and understand his will,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and, having been carefully instructed from the Law, have learned to appreciate the finer moral distinctions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Perhaps you are confident that you are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in the dark, an instructor of the unintelligent,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and a teacher of the childish, because in the Law you possess the outline of all knowledge and truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Why, then, you teacher of others, don\uc1\u8217*t you teach yourself? Do you preach against stealing, and yet steal?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Do you forbid adultery, and yet commit adultery? Do you loathe idols, and yet plunder temples?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Boasting, as you do, of your Law, do you dishonour God by breaking the Law?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For, as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The Gentiles insult God\uc1\u8217*s name because of you\uc1\u8221*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Circumcision has its value, if you are obeying the Law. But, if you are a breaker of the Law, your circumcision is no better than uncircumcision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}If, then, an uncircumcised man pays regard to the requirements of the Law, won\uc1\u8217*t he, although not circumcised, be regarded by God as if he were?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Indeed, the person who, owing to his birth, remains uncircumcised, and yet scrupulously obeys the Law, will condemn you, who, for all your written Law and your circumcision, are yet a breaker of the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For a man who is only a Jew outwardly is not a real Jew; nor is outward bodily circumcision real circumcision. The real Jew is the person who is a Jew in soul;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}and the real circumcision is the circumcision of the heart, a spiritual and not a literal thing. Such a person wins praise from God, though not from people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}What is the advantage, then, of being a Jew? Or what is the good of circumcision?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Great in every way. First of all, because the Jews were entrusted with God\uc1\u8217*s utterances.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What follows then? Some, no doubt, showed a want of faith; but will their want of faith make God break faith? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}God must prove true, though everyone prove a liar! As scripture says of God \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*That you may be pronounced righteous in what you say, and gain your cause when people would judge you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But what if our wrongdoing makes God\uc1\u8217*s righteousness all the clearer? Will God be wrong in inflicting punishment? (I can but speak as a person.) Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Otherwise how can God judge the world?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But, if my falsehood redounds to the glory of God, by making his truthfulness more apparent, why am I like others, still condemned as a sinner?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Why should we not say \uc1\u8211* as some people slanderously assert that we do say \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Let us do evil that good may come\uc1\u8221*? The condemnation of such people is indeed just!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What follows, then? Are we Jews in any way superior to others? Not at all. Our indictment against both Jews and Greeks was that all alike were in subjection to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}As scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*There is not even one who is righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}not one who understands,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 not one who is searching for God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}They have all gone astray;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have one and all become depraved;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 there is no one who is doing good \uc1\u8211* no, not one!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}\uc1\u8220*Their throats are like opened graves;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they deceive with their tongues.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The venom of snakes lies behind their lips,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*And their mouths are full of bitter curses.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}\uc1\u8220*Swift are their feet to shed blood.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Distress and trouble dog their steps,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and the path of peace they do not know.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8220*The fear of God is not before their eyes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Now we know that everything said in the Law is addressed to those who are under its authority, in order that every mouth may be closed, and to bring the whole world under God\uc1\u8217*s judgment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For no human being will be pronounced righteous before God as the result of obedience to Law; for it is Law that shows what sin is.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But now, quite apart from Law, the divine righteousness stands revealed, and to it the Law and the prophets bear witness \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}the divine righteousness which is bestowed, through faith in Jesus Christ, on all, without distinction, who believe in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For all have sinned, and all fall short of God\uc1\u8217*s glorious ideal,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but, in his loving kindness, are being freely pronounced righteous through the deliverance found in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For God set him before the world, to be, by the shedding of his blood, a means of reconciliation through faith. And this God did to prove his righteousness, and because, in his forbearance, he had passed over the sins that people had previously committed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}as a proof, I repeat, at the present time, of his own righteousness, that he might be righteous in our eyes, and might pronounce righteous the person who takes their stand on faith in Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}What, then, becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. By what sort of Law? A Law requiring obedience? No, a Law requiring faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For we conclude that a person is pronounced righteous on the ground of faith, quite apart from obedience to Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Or can it be that God is the God only of the Jews? Isn\uc1\u8217*t he also the God of the Gentiles?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Yes, of the Gentiles also, since there is only one God, and he will pronounce those who are circumcised righteous as the result of faith, and also those who are uncircumcised on their showing the same faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Do we, then, use this faith to abolish Law? Heaven forbid! No, we establish Law.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}What then, it may be asked, are we to say about Abraham, the ancestor of our nation?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If he was pronounced righteous as the result of obedience, then he has something to boast of. Yes, but not before God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For what are the words of scripture? \uc1\u8220*Abraham had faith in God, and his faith was regarded by God as righteousness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Now wages are regarded as due to the person who works, not as a favour, but as a debt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}while, as for the person who does not rely on their obedience, but has faith in him who can pronounce the godless righteous, their faith is regarded by God as righteousness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In precisely the same way David speaks of the blessing pronounced on the person who is regarded by God as righteous apart from actions \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*Blessed are those whose wrongdoings have been forgiven and over whose sins a veil has been drawn!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Blessed the man whom the Lord will never regard as sinful!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Is this blessing, then, pronounced on the circumcised only or on the uncircumcised as well? We say that \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Abraham\uc1\u8217*s faith was regarded by God as righteousness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Under what circumstances, then, did this take place? After his circumcision or before it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Not after, but before. And it was as a sign of this that he received the rite of circumcision \uc1\u8211* to show the righteousness due to the faith of an uncircumcised man \uc1\u8211* in order that he might be the father of all who have faith in God even when uncircumcised, so that they also may be regarded by God as righteous;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}as well as father of the circumcised \uc1\u8211* to those who are not only circumcised, but who also follow our father Abraham in that faith which he had while still uncircumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For the promise that he should inherit the world did not come to Abraham or his descendants through Law, but through the righteousness due to faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If those who take their stand on Law are to inherit the world, then faith is robbed of its meaning and the promise comes to nothing!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Law entails punishment; but, where no Law exists, no breach of it is possible.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}That is why everything is made to depend on faith: so that everything may be God\uc1\u8217*s gift, and in order that the fulfilment of the promise may be made certain for all Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants \uc1\u8211* not only for those who take their stand on the Law, but also for those who take their stand on the faith of Abraham. (He is the father of us all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I have made you the father of many nations.\uc1\u8221*) And this they do in the sight of that God in whom Abraham had faith, and who gives life to the dead, and speaks of what does not yet exist as if it did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}With no ground for hope, Abraham, sustained by hope, put faith in God; in order that, in fulfilment of the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*So many will your descendants be,\uc1\u8221* he might become \uc1\u8220*the father of many nations.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Though he was nearly a hundred years old, yet his faith did not fail him, even when he thought of his own body, then utterly worn out, and remembered that Sarah was past bearing children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He was not led by want of faith to doubt God\uc1\u8217*s promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}On the contrary, his faith gave him strength; and he praised God, in the firm conviction that what God has promised he is also able to carry out.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And therefore his faith \uc1\u8220*was regarded as righteousness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Now these words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*it was regarded as righteousness\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* were not written with reference to Abraham only;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but also with reference to us. Our faith, too, will be regarded by God in the same light, if we have faith in him who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}for Jesus was given up to death to atone for our offences, and was raised to life that we might be pronounced righteous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Therefore, having been pronounced righteous as the result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It is through him that, by reason of our faith, we have obtained admission to that place in God\uc1\u8217*s favour in which we now stand. So let us exult in our hope of attaining God\uc1\u8217*s glorious ideal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And not only that, but let us also exult in our troubles;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for we know that trouble develops endurance, and endurance strength of character, and strength of character hope,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and that hope never disappoints. For the love of God has filled our hearts through the Holy Spirit which was given us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}seeing that, while we were still powerless, Christ, in God\uc1\u8217*s good time, died on behalf of the godless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Even for an upright person scarcely anyone will die. For a really good person perhaps someone might even dare to die.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But God puts his love for us beyond all doubt by the fact that Christ died on our behalf while we were still sinners.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Much more, then, now that we have been pronounced righteous by virtue of the shedding of his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For if, when we were God\uc1\u8217*s enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, much more, now that we have become reconciled, will we be saved by virtue of Christ\uc1\u8217*s life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And not only that, but we exult in God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, through whom we have now obtained this reconciliation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and through sin came death; so, also, death spread to all humanity, because every person has sinned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Even before the time of the Law there was sin in the world; but sin cannot be charged against someone where no Law exists.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet, from Adam to Moses, death reigned even over those whose sin was not a breach of a law, as Adam\uc1\u8217*s was. And Adam foreshadows the one to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But there is a contrast between Adam\uc1\u8217*s offence and God\uc1\u8217*s gracious gift. For, if by reason of the offence of the one man the whole human race died, far more were the loving kindness of God, and the gift given in the loving kindness of the one man, Jesus Christ, lavished on the whole human race.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}There is a contrast, too, between the gift and the results of the one man\uc1\u8217*s sin. The judgment, which followed on the one man\uc1\u8217*s sin, resulted in condemnation, but God\uc1\u8217*s gracious gift, which followed on many offences, resulted in a decree of righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For if, by reason of the offence of the one man, death reigned through that one man, far more will those, on whom God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness and his gift of righteousness are lavished, find life, and reign through the one man, Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Briefly then, just as a single offence resulted for all humanity in condemnation, so, too, a single decree of righteousness resulted for all humanity in that declaration of righteousness which brings life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For, as through the disobedience of the one man the whole human race was rendered sinful, so, too, through the obedience of the one, the whole human race will be rendered righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Law was introduced in order that offences might be multiplied. But, where sins were multiplied, the loving kindness of God was lavished the more,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}in order that, just as sin had reigned in the realm of death, so, too, might loving-kindness reign through righteousness, and result in eternal life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Difficulties arising from this Teaching

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}What are we to say, then? Are we to continue to sin, in order that God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness may be multiplied?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Heaven forbid! We became dead to sin, so how can we go on living in it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Or can it be that you do not know that all of us, who were baptized into union with Christ Jesus, in our baptism shared his death?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Consequently, through sharing his death in our baptism, we were buried with him; so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by a manifestation of the Father\uc1\u8217*s power, so we also may live a new life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If we have become united with him by the act symbolic of his death, surely we will also become united with him by the act symbolic of his resurrection.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We recognise the truth that our old self was crucified with Christ, in order that the body, the stronghold of sin, might be rendered powerless, so that we should no longer be slaves to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the man who has so died has been pronounced righteous and released from sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And our belief is, that, as we have shared Christ\uc1\u8217*s death, we will also share his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We know, indeed, that Christ, having once risen from the dead, will not die again. Death has power over him no longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the death that he died was a death to sin, once and for all. But the life that he now lives, he lives for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So let it be with you \uc1\u8211* regard yourselves as dead to sin, but as living for God, through union with Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal bodies and compel you to obey its cravings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Do not offer any part of your bodies to sin, in the cause of unrighteousness, but once for all offer yourselves to God (as those who, though once dead, now have life), and devote every part of your bodies to the cause of righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For sin will not lord it over you. You are living under the reign, not of Law, but of love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}What follows, then? Are we to sin because we are living under the reign of love and not of Law? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Surely you know that when you offer yourselves as servants, to obey anyone, you are the servants of the person whom you obey, whether the service be a service to sin which leads to death, or a service to duty which leads to righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}God be thanked that, though you were once servants of sin, yet you learned to give hearty obedience to that form of doctrine under which you were placed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Set free from the control of sin, you became servants to righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I can but speak as people do because of the weakness of your earthly nature. Once you offered every part of your bodies to the service of impurity, and of wickedness, which leads to further wickedness. Now, in the same way, offer them to the service of righteousness, which leads to holiness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}While you were still servants of sin, you were free as regards righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But what were the fruits that you reaped from those things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of such things is death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But now that you have been set free from the control of sin, and have become servants to God, the fruit that you reap is an ever increasing holiness, and the end eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The wages of sin are death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through union with Christ Jesus, our Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}Surely, friends, you know (for I am speaking to people who know what Law means) that Law has power over a person only as long as they lives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband while he is living; but, if her husband dies, she is set free from the law that bound her to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If, then, during her husband\uc1\u8217*s lifetime, she unites herself to another man, she will be called an adulteress; but, if her husband dies, the law has no further hold on her, nor, if she unites herself to another man, is she an adulteress.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And so with you, my friends; as far as the Law was concerned, you underwent death in the crucified body of the Christ, so that you might be united to another, to him who was raised from the dead, in order that our lives might bear fruit for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When we were living merely earthly lives, our sinful passions, aroused by the Law, were active in every part of our bodies, with the result that our lives bore fruit for death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But now we are set free from the Law, because we are dead to that which once kept us under restraint; and so we serve under new, spiritual conditions, and not under old, written regulations.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}What are we to say, then? That Law and sin are the same thing? Heaven forbid! On the contrary, I should not have learned what sin is, had not it been for Law. If the Law did not say \uc1\u8220*You must not covet,\uc1\u8221* I should not know what it is to covet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But sin took advantage of the commandment to arouse in me every form of covetousness, for where there is no consciousness of Law sin shows no sign of life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There was a time when I myself, unconscious of Law, was alive; but when the commandment was brought home to me, sin sprang into life, while I died!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The commandment that should have meant life I found to result in death!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Sin took advantage of the commandment to deceive me, and used it to bring about my death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so the Law is holy, and each commandment is also holy, and just, and good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Did, then, a thing, which in itself was good, involve death in my case? Heaven forbid! It was sin that involved death; so that, by its use of what I regarded as good to bring about my death, its true nature might appear; and in this way the commandment showed how intensely sinful sin is.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am earthly \uc1\u8211* sold into slavery to sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I do not understand my own actions. For I am so far from habitually doing what I want to do, that I find myself doing the thing that I hate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But when I do what I want not to do, I am admitting that the Law is right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This being so, the action is no longer my own, but is done by the sin which is within me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I know that there is nothing good in me \uc1\u8211* I mean in my earthly nature. For, although it is easy for me to want to do right, to act rightly is not easy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I fail to do the good thing that I want to do, but the bad thing that I want not to do \uc1\u8211* that I habitually do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But, when I do the thing that I want not to do, the action is no longer my own, but is done by the sin which is within me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}This, then, is the law that I find \uc1\u8211* when I want to do right, wrong presents itself!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}At heart I delight in the Law of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}but throughout my body I see a different law, one which is in conflict with the law accepted by my reason, and which endeavours to make me a prisoner to that law of sin which exists throughout my body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Miserable man that I am! Who will deliver me from the body that is bringing me to this death?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Thank God, there is deliverance through Jesus Christ, our Lord! Well then, for myself, with my reason I serve the Law of God, but with my earthly nature the Law of sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}There is, therefore, now no condemnation for those who are in union with Christ Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for through your union with Christ Jesus, the Law of the life-giving Spirit has set you free from the Law of sin and death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}What Law could not do, in so far as our earthly nature weakened its action, God did, by sending his own Son, with a nature resembling our sinful nature, to atone for sin. He condemned sin in that earthly nature,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}so that the requirements of the Law might be satisfied in us who live now in obedience, not to our earthly nature, but to the Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They who follow their earthly nature are earthly-minded, while they who follow the Spirit are spiritually minded.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}To be earthly-minded means death, to be spiritually minded means life and peace;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}because to be earthly-minded is to be an enemy to God, for such a mind does not submit to the Law of God, nor indeed can it do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}They who are earthly cannot please God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You, however, are not earthly but spiritual, since the Spirit of God lives within you. Unless a person has the Spirit of Christ, they do not belong to Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but, if Christ is within you, then, though the body is dead as a consequence of sin, the spirit is life as a consequence of righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And, if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead lives within you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life even to your mortal bodies, through his Spirit living within you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So then, friends, we owe nothing to our earthly nature, that we should live in obedience to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If you live in obedience to your earthly nature, you will inevitably die; but if, by the power of the Spirit, you put an end to the evil habits of the body, you will live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}All who are guided by the Spirit of God are children of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For you did not receive the spirit of a slave, to fill you once more with fear, but the spirit of a child by adoption, which leads us to cry \uc1\u8220*Abba, our Father.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The Spirit himself unites with our spirits in bearing witness to our being God\uc1\u8217*s children,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and if children, then heirs \uc1\u8211* heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, since we share Christ\uc1\u8217*s sufferings in order that we may also share his glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I do not count the sufferings of our present life worthy of mention when compared with the glory that is to be revealed and bestowed on us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}All nature awaits with eager expectation the appearing of the sons of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For nature was made subject to imperfection \uc1\u8211* not by its own choice, but owing to him who made it so \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}yet not without the hope that some day nature, also, will be set free from enslavement to decay, and will attain to the freedom which will mark the glory of the children of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}We know, indeed, that all nature alike has been groaning in the pains of labour to this very hour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And not nature only; but we ourselves also, though we have already a first gift of the Spirit \uc1\u8211* we ourselves are inwardly groaning, while we eagerly await our full adoption as sons \uc1\u8211* the redemption of our bodies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}By our hope we were saved. But the thing hoped for is no longer an object of hope when it is before our eyes; for who hopes for what is before his eyes?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But when we hope for what is not before our eyes, then we wait for it with patience.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}So, also, the Spirit supports us in our weakness. We do not even know how to pray as we should; but the Spirit himself pleads for us in sighs that can find no utterance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Yet he who searches all our hearts knows what the Spirit\uc1\u8217*s meaning is, because the pleadings of the Spirit for Christ\uc1\u8217*s people are in accordance with his will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But we do know that God causes all things to work together for the good of those who love him \uc1\u8211* those who have received the call in accordance with his purpose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For those whom God chose from the first he also destined from the first to be transformed into likeness to his Son, so that his Son might be the eldest among many brothers and sisters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And those whom God destined for this he also called; and those whom he called he also pronounced righteous; and those whom he pronounced righteous he also brought to glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}What are we to say, then, in the light of all this?
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 If God is on our side, who can there be against us?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}God did not withhold his own Son, but gave him up on behalf of us all; will he not, then, with him, freely give us all things?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Who will bring a charge against any of God\uc1\u8217*s people? He who pronounces them righteous is God!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Who is there to condemn them? He who died for us is Christ Jesus! \uc1\u8211* or, rather, it was he who was raised from the dead, and who is now at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand and is even pleading on our behalf!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Who is there to separate us from the love of the Christ? Will trouble, or difficulty, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or the sword?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*For your sake we are being killed all the day long, We are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}Yet amid all these things we more than conquer through him who loved us!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor archangels, nor the present, nor the future, nor any powers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God revealed in Christ Jesus, our Lord!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Gentiles and Jews

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}I am speaking the truth as one in union with Christ; it is no lie; and my conscience, enlightened by the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}bears me out when I say that there is a great weight of sorrow on me and that my heart is never free from pain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I could wish that I were myself accursed and severed from the Christ, for the sake of my people \uc1\u8211* my own flesh and blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For they are Israelites, and theirs are the adoption as children, the visible presence, the covenants, the revealed Law, the Temple worship, and the promises.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}They are descended from the patriarchs, and, as far as his human nature was concerned, from them came the Christ \uc1\u8211* he who is supreme over all things, God for ever blessed. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Not that God\uc1\u8217*s Word has failed. For it is not all who are descended from Israel who are true Israelites;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}nor, because they are Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants, are they all his children; but \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*It is Isaac\uc1\u8217*s children who will be called your descendants.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This means that it is not the children born in the course of nature who are God\uc1\u8217*s children, but it is the children born in fulfilment of the promise who are to be regarded as Abraham\uc1\u8217*s descendants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For these words are the words of a promise \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*About this time I will come, and Sarah will have a son.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Nor is that all. There is also the case of Rebecca, when she was about to bear children to our ancestor Isaac.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For in order that the purpose of God, working through selection, might not fail \uc1\u8211* a selection depending, not on obedience, but on his call \uc1\u8211* Rebecca was told, before her children were born and before they had done anything either right or wrong,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}that the elder would be a servant to the younger.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The words of scripture are \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I loved Jacob, but I hated Esau.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}What are we to say, then? Is God guilty of injustice? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For his words to Moses are \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I will take pity on whom I take pity, and be merciful to whom I am merciful.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So, then, all depends, not on human wishes or human efforts, but on God\uc1\u8217*s mercy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In scripture, again, it is said to Pharaoh \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*It was for this purpose that I raised you to the throne, to show my power by my dealings with you, and to make my name known throughout the world.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}So, then, where God wills, he takes pity, and where he wills, he hardens the heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Perhaps you will say to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*How can anyone still be blamed? For who withstands his purpose?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I might rather ask \uc1\u8220*Who are you who are arguing with God?\uc1\u8221* Does a thing which a person has moulded say to the person who has moulded it \uc1\u8220*Why did you make me like this?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Has not the potter absolute power over their clay, so that out of the same lump they make one thing for better, and another for common, use?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And what if God, intending to reveal his displeasure and make his power known, bore most patiently with the objects of his displeasure, though they were fit only to be destroyed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}so as to make known his surpassing glory in dealing with the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared beforehand for glory,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and whom he called \uc1\u8211* even us \uc1\u8211* not only from among the Jews but from among the Gentiles also!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}This, indeed, is what he says in the book of Hosea \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Those who were not my people, I will call my people, and those who were unloved I will love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And in the place where it was said to them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You are not my people\uc1\u8217*, they will be called sons of the living God.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And Isaiah cries aloud over Israel \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Though the sons of Israel are like the sand of the sea in number, only a remnant of them will escape!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}For the Lord will execute his sentence on the world, fully and without delay.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It is as Isaiah foretold \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Had not the Lord of Hosts spared some few of our people to us, we should have become like Sodom and been made to resemble Gomorrah.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}What are we to say, then? Why, that Gentiles, who were not in search of righteousness, secured it \uc1\u8211* a righteousness which was the result of faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}while Israel, which was in search of a Law which would ensure righteousness, failed to discover one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}And why? Because they looked to obedience, and not to faith, to secure it. They stumbled over the stumbling-block.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*See, I place a stumbling-block in Zion \uc1\u8211* a rock which will prove a hindrance; and he who believes in him will have no cause for shame.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}My friends, my heart\uc1\u8217*s desire and prayer to God for my people is for their salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I can testify that they are zealous for the honour of God; but they are not guided by true insight,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}for, in their ignorance of the divine righteousness, and in their eagerness to set up a righteousness of their own, they refused to accept with submission the divine righteousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For Christ has brought Law to an end, so that righteousness may be obtained by everyone who believes in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For Moses writes that, as for the righteousness which results from Law, those who practice it will find life through it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But the righteousness which results from faith finds expression in these words: \uc1\u8220*Do not say to yourself \uc1\u8216*Who will go up into heaven?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* (which means to bring Christ down){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8220*or \uc1\u8216*Who will go down into the depths below?\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* (which means to bring Christ up from the dead).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}No, but what does it say? \uc1\u8220*The message is near you, on your lips and in your heart\uc1\u8221* (which means \uc1\u8220*The message of faith\uc1\u8221* which we proclaim).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For, if with your lips you acknowledge the truth of the message that JESUS IS LORD, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For with their hearts people believe and so attain to righteousness, while with their lips they make their profession of faith and so find salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}As the passage of scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*No one who believes in him will have any cause for shame.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For no distinction is made between the Jew and the Greek, for all have the same Lord, and he is bountiful to all who invoke him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For everyone who invokes the name of the Lord will be saved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But how, it may be asked, are they to invoke one in whom they have not learned to believe? And how are they to believe in one whose words they have not heard? And how are they to hear his words unless someone proclaims him?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And how is anyone to proclaim him unless they are sent as his messengers? As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Still, it may be said, everyone did not give heed to the good news. No, for Isaiah asks \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Lord, who has believed our teaching?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And so we gather, faith is a result of teaching, and the teaching comes in the message of Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But I ask \uc1\u8220*Is it possible that people have never heard?\uc1\u8221* No, indeed, for \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Their voices spread through all the earth, and their message to the ends of the world.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But again I ask \uc1\u8220*Did not the people of Israel understand?\uc1\u8221* First there is Moses, who says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I, the Lord, will stir you to rivalry with a nation which is no nation; against an undiscerning nation I will arouse your anger.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And Isaiah says boldly \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I was found by those who were not seeking me; I made myself known to those who were not inquiring of me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But of the people of Israel he says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*All day long I have stretched out my hands to a people who disobey and contradict.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}I ask, then, \uc1\u8220*Has God rejected his people?\uc1\u8221* Heaven forbid! For I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}God has not rejected his people, whom he chose from the first. Have you forgotten the words of scripture in the story of Elijah \uc1\u8211* how he appeals to God against Israel?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have pulled down your altars, and I only am left; and now they are eager to take my life.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But what was the divine response? \uc1\u8220*I have kept for myself seven thousand who have never bowed the knee to Baal.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And so in our own time, too, there is to be found a remnant of our nation selected by God in love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But if in love, then it is not as a result of obedience. Otherwise love would cease to be love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}What follows from this? Why, that Israel as a nation failed to secure what it was seeking, while those whom God selected did secure it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The rest grew callous; as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*God has given them a deadness of mind \uc1\u8211* eyes that are not to see and ears that are not to hear \uc1\u8211* and it is so to this very day.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}David, too, says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*May their feasts prove a snare and a trap to them \uc1\u8211* a hindrance and a retribution;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}may their eyes be darkened, so that they cannot see; and do you always make their backs to bend.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I ask then \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Was their stumbling to result in their fall?\uc1\u8221* Heaven forbid! On the contrary, through their falling away salvation has reached the Gentiles, to stir the rivalry of Israel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And, if their falling away has enriched the world, and their failure has enriched the Gentiles, how much more will result from their full restoration!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I am speaking to you who were Gentiles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Being myself an apostle to the Gentiles, I exalt my office, in the hope that I may stir my countrymen to rivalry, and so save some of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For, if their being cast aside has meant the reconciliation of the world, what will their reception mean, but life from the dead?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If the first handful of dough is holy, so is the whole mass, and if the root is holy, so are the branches.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Some, however, of the branches were broken off, and you, who were only a wild olive, were grafted in among them, and came to share with them the root which is the source of the richness of the cultivated olive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yet do not exult over the other branches. But, if you do exult over them, remember that you do not support the root, but that the root supports you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But branches, you will say, were broken off, so that I might be grafted in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}True, it was because of their want of faith that they were broken off, and it is because of your faith that you are standing. Do not think too highly of yourself, but beware.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For, if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}See, then, both the goodness and the severity of God \uc1\u8211* his severity towards those who fell, and his goodness towards you, provided that you continue to confide in that goodness; otherwise you, also, will be cut off.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And they, too, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in; for God has it in his power to graft them in again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}If you were cut off from your natural stock \uc1\u8211* a wild olive \uc1\u8211* and were grafted, contrary to the course of nature, on a good olive, much more will they \uc1\u8211* the natural branches \uc1\u8211* be grafted back into their parent tree.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}My friends, so that you don\uc1\u8217*t think too highly of yourselves, I want you to recognise the truth, hitherto hidden, that the callousness which has come over Israel is only partial, and will continue only until the whole Gentile world has been gathered in.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And then all Israel will be saved. As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*From Zion will come the Deliverer; he will banish ungodliness from Jacob.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And they will see the fulfilment of my covenant, when I have taken away their sins.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}From the standpoint of the good news, the Jews are God\uc1\u8217*s enemies for your sake; but from the standpoint of God\uc1\u8217*s selection, they are dear to him for the sake of the patriarchs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For God never regrets his gifts or his call.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Just as you at one time were disobedient to him, but have now found mercy in the day of their disobedience;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}so, too, they have now become disobedient in your day of mercy, in order that they also in their turn may now find mercy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}For God has given all alike over to disobedience, that to all alike he may show mercy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Oh! The unfathomable wisdom and knowledge of God! How inscrutable are his judgments, how untraceable his ways! Yes \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}ho has ever comprehended the mind of the Lord? Who has ever become his counsellor?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Or who has first given to him, so that he may claim a reward?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}For all things are from him, through him, and for him. And to him be all glory for ever and ever! Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Advice on Daily Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}I entreat you, then, friends, by the mercies of God, to offer your bodies as a living and holy sacrifice, acceptable to God, for this is your rational worship.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Do not conform to the fashion of this world; but be transformed by the complete change that has come over your minds, so that you may discern what God\uc1\u8217*s will is \uc1\u8211* all that is good, acceptable, and perfect.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In fulfilment of the charge with which I have been entrusted, I tell every one of you not to think more highly of themselves than they ought to think, but to think until they learn to think soberly \uc1\u8211* in accordance with the measure of faith that God has allotted to each.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For, just as in the human body there is a union of many parts, and each part has its own function,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}so we, by our union in Christ, many though we are, form but one body, and individually we are related one to another as its parts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Since our gifts differ in accordance with the particular charge entrusted to us, if our gift is to preach, let our preaching correspond to our faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}if it is to minister to others, let us devote ourselves to our ministry; the teacher to their teaching,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}the counselor to their counsel. Let the person who gives in charity do so with a generous heart; let the person who is in authority exercise due diligence; let the person who shows kindness do so in a cheerful spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let your love be sincere. Hate the wrong; cling to the right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In the love of the community of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, be affectionate to one another; in showing respect, set an example of deference to one another;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}never flagging in zeal; fervent in spirit; serving the Master;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}rejoicing in your hope; steadfast under persecution; persevering in prayer;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}relieving the wants of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people; devoted to hospitality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Bless your persecutors \uc1\u8211* bless and never curse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Rejoice with those who are rejoicing, and weep with those who are weeping.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Let the same spirit of sympathy animate you all, not a spirit of pride; enjoy the company of ordinary people. Do not think too highly of yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Never return injury for injury. Aim at doing what everyone will recognise as honourable.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If it is possible, as far as rests with you, live peaceably with everyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Never avenge yourselves, dear friends, but make way for the wrath of God; for scripture declares \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*It is for me to avenge, I will requite,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Rather \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*If your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him to drink. By doing this you will heap coals of fire on his head.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Never be conquered by evil, but conquer evil with good.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Let everyone obey the supreme authorities. For no authority exists except by the will of God, and the existing authorities have been appointed by God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Therefore the one who sets themself against the authorities is resisting God\uc1\u8217*s appointment, and those who resist will bring a judgment on themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}A good action has nothing to fear from rulers; a bad action has. Do you want to have no reason to fear the authorities? Then do what is good, and you will win their praise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For they are God\uc1\u8217*s servants appointed for your good. But, if you do what is wrong, you may well be afraid; for the sword they carry is not without meaning! They are God\uc1\u8217*s servants to inflict his punishments on those who do wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You are bound, therefore, to obey, not only through fear of God\uc1\u8217*s punishments, but also as a matter of conscience.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}This, too, is the reason for your paying taxes; for the officials are God\uc1\u8217*s officers, devoting themselves to this special work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In all cases pay what is due from you \uc1\u8211* tribute where tribute is due, taxes where taxes are due, respect where respect is due, and honour where honour is due.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Owe nothing to anyone except love; for they who love their neighbour have satisfied the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The commandments, \uc1\u8220*You must not commit adultery, you must not kill, you must not steal, you must not covet,\uc1\u8221* and whatever other commandment there is, are all summed up in the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Love never wrongs a neighbour. Therefore love fully satisfies the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}This I say, because you know the crisis that we have reached, for the time has already come for you to rouse yourselves from sleep; our salvation is nearer now than when we accepted the faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The night is almost gone; the day is near. Therefore let us be done with the deeds of darkness, and arm ourselves with the weapons of light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Being in the light of day, let us live becomingly, not in revelry and drunkenness, not in lust and licentiousness, not in quarrelling and jealousy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}No! Arm yourselves with the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and spend no thought on your earthly nature, to satisfy its cravings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}As for those whose faith is weak, always receive them as friends, but not for the purpose of passing judgment on their scruples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}One person\uc1\u8217*s faith permits them to eat food of all kinds, while another whose faith is weak eats only vegetable food.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The person who eats meat must not despise the person who abstains from it; nor must the person who abstains from eating meat pass judgment on the one who eats it, for God himself has received them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Who are you, that you should pass judgment on the servant of another? Their standing or falling concerns their own master. And stand they will, for their Master can enable them to stand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Again, one person considers some days to be more sacred than others, while another considers all days to be alike. Everyone ought to be fully convinced in their own mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The person who observes a day, observes it to the Master\uc1\u8217*s honour. They, again, who eat meat eat it to the Master\uc1\u8217*s honour, for they give thanks to God; while the person who abstains from it abstains from it to the Master\uc1\u8217*s honour, and also gives thanks to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}There is not one of us whose life concerns ourselves alone, and not one of us whose death concerns ourself alone;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for, if we live, our life is for the Master, and, if we die, our death is for the Master. Whether, then, we live or die we belong to the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The purpose for which Christ died and came back to life was this \uc1\u8211* that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I would ask the one \uc1\u8220*Why do you judge other followers of the Lord?\uc1\u8221* And I would ask the other \uc1\u8220*Why do you despise them?\uc1\u8221* For we will all stand before the court of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*As surely as I live,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord, \uc1\u8216*every knee will bend before me and every tongue will praise God.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So, then, each one of us will have to render account of himself to God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Let us, then, cease to judge one another. Rather let this be your resolve \uc1\u8211* never to place a stumbling-block or an obstacle in the way of a fellow follower of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Through my union with the Lord Jesus, I know and am persuaded that nothing is defiling in itself. A thing is \uc1\u8220*defiling\uc1\u8221* only to the person who holds it to be so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If, for the sake of what you eat, you wound your fellow follower\uc1\u8217*s feelings, your life has ceased to be ruled by love. Do not, by what you eat, ruin someone for whom Christ died!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Do not let what is right for you become a matter of reproach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For the kingdom of God does not consist of eating and drinking, but of righteousness and peace and gladness through the presence of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The person who serves the Christ in this way pleases God, and wins the approval of their fellows.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore our efforts should be directed towards all that makes for peace and the mutual building up of character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Do not undo God\uc1\u8217*s work for the sake of what you eat. Though everything is \uc1\u8220*clean,\uc1\u8221* yet, if a person eats so as to put a stumbling-block in the way of others, they do wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The right course is to abstain from meat or wine or, indeed, anything that is a stumbling-block to your fellow follower of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}As for yourself \uc1\u8211* keep this conviction of yours to yourself, as in the presence of God. Happy the person who never has to condemn themselves in regard to something they think right!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The person, however, who has misgivings stands condemned if they still eat, because their doing so is not the result of faith. And anything not done as the result of faith is a sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}We, the strong, ought to take on our own shoulders the weaknesses of those who are not strong, and not merely to please ourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Let each of us please our neighbour for our neighbour\uc1\u8217*s good, to help in the building up of their character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Even the Christ did not please himself! On the contrary, as scripture says of him \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The reproaches of those who were reproaching you fell upon me.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Whatever was written in the scriptures in days gone by was written for our instruction, so that, through patient endurance, and through the encouragement drawn from the scriptures, we might hold fast to our hope.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And may God, the giver of this patience and this encouragement, grant you to be united in sympathy in Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}so that with one heart and one voice you may praise the God and Father of Jesus Christ, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore always receive one another as friends, just as the Christ himself received us, to the glory of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For I tell you that Christ, in vindication of God\uc1\u8217*s truthfulness, has become a minister of the covenant of circumcision, so that he may fulfil the promises made to our ancestors,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and that the Gentiles also may praise God for his mercy. As scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Therefore will I make acknowledgment to you among the Gentiles and sing in honour of your name.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And again it says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Rejoice, you Gentiles, with God\uc1\u8217*s people.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And yet again \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and let all Peoples sing his praises.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Again, Isaiah says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*There will be a Scion of the house of Jesse, One who is to arise to rule the Gentiles; on him will the Gentiles rest their hopes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}May God, who inspires our hope, grant you perfect happiness and peace in your faith, until you are filled with this hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am persuaded, my friends \uc1\u8211* yes, I Paul, with regard to you \uc1\u8211* that you are yourselves full of kindness, furnished with all Christian learning, and well able to give advice to one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But in parts of this letter I have expressed myself somewhat boldly \uc1\u8211* by way of refreshing your memories \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}because of the charge with which God has entrusted me, that I should be an assistant of Christ Jesus to go to the Gentiles \uc1\u8211* that I should act as a priest of God\uc1\u8217*s good news, so that the offering up of the Gentiles may be an acceptable sacrifice, consecrated by the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It is, then, through my union with Christ Jesus that I have a proud confidence in my work for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For I will not dare to speak of anything but what Christ has done through me to win the obedience of the Gentiles \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}by my words and actions, through the power displayed in signs and marvels, and through the power of the Holy Spirit. And so, starting from Jerusalem and going as far as Illyria, I have told in full the good news of the Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}yet always with the ambition to tell the good news where Christ\uc1\u8217*s name had not previously been heard, so as to avoid building on another\uc1\u8217*s foundations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}But as scripture says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They to whom he had never been proclaimed will see; and they who have never heard will understand!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}That is why I have so often been prevented from coming to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But now there are no further openings for me in these parts, and I have for several years been longing to come to you whenever I may be going to Spain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For my hope is to visit you on my journey, and then to be sent on my way by you, after I have first partly satisfied myself by seeing something of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Just now, however, I am on my way to Jerusalem, to take help to Christ\uc1\u8217*s people there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For Macedonia and Greece have been glad to make a collection for the poor among Christ\uc1\u8217*s people at Jerusalem.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Yes, they were glad to do so; and indeed it is a duty which they owe to them. For the Gentile converts who have shared their spiritual blessings are in duty bound to minister to them in the things of this world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When I have settled this matter, and have secured for the poor at Jerusalem the enjoyment of these benefits, I will go, by way of you, to Spain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And I know that, when I come to you, it will be with a full measure of blessing from Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}I beg you, then, friends, by Jesus Christ, our Lord, and by the love inspired by the Spirit, to join me in earnest prayer to God on my behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Pray that I may be rescued from those in Judea who reject the faith, and that the help which I am taking to Jerusalem may prove acceptable to Christ\uc1\u8217*s people;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}so that, God willing, I may be able to come to you with a joyful heart, and enjoy some rest among you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}May God, the giver of peace, be with you all. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}I commend to your care our sister, Phoebe, who is a minister of the church at Cenchreae;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and I ask you to give her a Christian welcome \uc1\u8211* one worthy of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people \uc1\u8211* and to aid her in any matter in which she may need your assistance. She has proved herself a staunch friend and protector and to many others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Give my greeting to Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in the cause of Christ Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}who risked their own lives to save mine. It is not I alone who thank them, but all the churches among the Gentiles thank them also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Give my greeting, also, to the church that meets at their house, as well as to my dear friend Epaenetus, one of the first in Roman Asia to believe in Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}to Mary, who worked hard for you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}to Andronicus and Junia, fellow Jews and once my fellow prisoners, who are people of note among the apostles, and who became Christians before I did;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}to my dear Christian friend Ampliatus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}to Urban, our fellow worker in the cause of Christ, and to my dear friend Stachys;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}to that tried and true Christian Apelles; to the household of Aristobulus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}to my countryman Herodion; to the Christians in the household of Narcissus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}to Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who have worked hard for the Master; to my dear friend Persis, for she has done much hard work for the Master;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}to that eminent Christian, Rufus, and to his mother, who has been a mother to me also;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and our friends with them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}also to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and to all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people who are with them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Greet one another with a sacred kiss. All the churches of the Christ send you greetings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I beg you, friends, to be on your guard against people who, by disregarding the teaching which you received, cause divisions and create difficulties; dissociate yourselves from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For such persons are not serving Christ, our Master, but are slaves to their own appetites; and, by their smooth words and flattery, they deceive simple-minded people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Everyone has heard of your ready obedience. It is true that I am very happy about you, but I want you to be well versed in all that is good, and innocent of all that is bad.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And God, the giver of peace, will before long crush Satan under your feet.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 May the blessing of Jesus, our Lord, be with you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Timothy, my fellow worker, sends you his greetings, and Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my countrymen, send theirs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I Tertius, who am writing this letter, send you my Christian greeting.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}My host Gaius, who extends his hospitality to the whole church, sends you his greeting; and Erastus, the city treasurer, and Quartus, our dear friend, add theirs.{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn {\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}  Some later manuscripts add: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. }
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Now to him who is able to strengthen you, as promised in the good news entrusted to me and in the proclamation of Jesus Christ, in accordance with the revelation of that hidden purpose, which in past ages was kept secret but now has been revealed{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and, in obedience to the command of the immortal God, made known through the writings of the prophets to all nations, to secure submission to the faith \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}to him, I say, the wise and only God, be ascribed, through Jesus Christ, all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 1 Corinthians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s First Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Corinthians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To the church of God in Corinth, to those who have been consecrated by union with Christ Jesus and called to become his people, and also to all, wherever they may be, who invoke the name of our Lord Jesus Christ \uc1\u8211* their Master and ours,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}from Paul, who has been called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and from Sosthenes, our fellow follower of the Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I always thank God for you. I thank him for the blessing bestowed on you in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For through union with him you were enriched in every way \uc1\u8211* in your power to preach, and in your knowledge of the truth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and so became yourselves a confirmation of my testimony to the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}There is no gift in which you are deficient, while waiting for our Lord Jesus Christ to be revealed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And God himself will strengthen you to the end, so that at the day of our Lord Jesus Christ you may be found blameless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}God will not fail you, and it is he who called you into communion with his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The State of the Church at Corinth

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But I appeal to you, my friends, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to agree in what you profess, and not to allow divisions to exist among you, but to be united \uc1\u8211* of one mind and of one opinion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For I have been informed, my friends, by the members of Chloe\uc1\u8217*s household, that party feeling exists among you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I mean this: that every one of you says either \uc1\u8220*I follow Paul,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*I Apollos,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*I Cephas,\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*I Christ.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You have torn the Christ in pieces! Was it Paul who was crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am thankful that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so that no one can say that you were baptized in my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I baptized also the household of Stephanas. I do not know that I baptized anyone else.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My mission from Christ was not to baptize, but to tell the good news; not, however, in the language of philosophy, in case the cross of the Christ should be robbed of its meaning.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The message of the cross is indeed mere folly to those who are on the path to ruin, but to us who are on the path of salvation it is the power of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will bring the philosophy of the philosophers to naught, and the shrewdness of the shrewd I will bring to nothing.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Where is the philosopher? Where the teacher of the Law? Where the disputant of today? Has not God shown the world\uc1\u8217*s philosophy to be folly?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For since the world, in God\uc1\u8217*s wisdom, did not by its philosophy learn to know God, God saw fit, by the \uc1\u8220*folly\uc1\u8221* of our proclamation, to save those who believe in Christ!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}While Jews ask for miraculous signs, and Greeks study philosophy,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}we are proclaiming Christ crucified! \uc1\u8211* to the Jews an obstacle, to the Gentiles mere folly,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but to those who have received the call, whether Jews or Greeks, Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For God\uc1\u8217*s \uc1\u8220*folly\uc1\u8221* is wiser than people, and God\uc1\u8217*s \uc1\u8220*weakness\uc1\u8221* is stronger than people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Look at the facts of your call, friends. There are not many among you who are wise, as people reckon wisdom, not many who are influential, not many who are high-born;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}but God chose what the world counts foolish to put its wise to shame, and God chose what the world counts weak to put its strong to shame,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and God chose what the world counts poor and insignificant \uc1\u8211* things that to it are unreal \uc1\u8211* to bring its \uc1\u8220*realities\uc1\u8221* to nothing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}so that in his presence no one should boast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But you, by your union with Christ Jesus, belong to God; and Christ, by God\uc1\u8217*s will, became not only our wisdom, but also our righteousness, holiness, and deliverance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}so that \uc1\u8211* in the words of scripture \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Whoever boasts should boast of the Lord!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}For my own part, friends, when I came to you, it was with no display of eloquence or philosophy that I came to tell the hidden purpose of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for I had determined that, while with you, I would forget everything except Jesus Christ \uc1\u8211* and him crucified!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Indeed, when I came among you, I was weak, and full of fears, and in great anxiety.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}My message and my proclamation were not delivered in the persuasive language of philosophy, but were accompanied by the manifestation of spiritual power,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}so that your faith should be based, not on the human wisdom, but on the power of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yet there is a philosophy that we teach to those whose faith is matured, but it is not the philosophy of today, or of the leaders of today \uc1\u8211* whose downfall is at hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}No, it is a divine philosophy that we teach, one concerned with the hidden purpose of God \uc1\u8211* that long hidden philosophy which God, before time began, destined for our glory.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This philosophy is clearly not known to any of the leaders of today, since, had they known it, they would never have crucified our glorious Lord!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It is what scripture speaks of as \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*What eye never saw, nor ear ever heard,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 what never entered people\uc1\u8217*s minds \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 all these things God has prepared for those who love him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Yet to us God revealed it through his Spirit; for the Spirit fathoms all things, even the inmost depths of God\uc1\u8217*s being.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For what person is there who knows what a person is, except the person\uc1\u8217*s own spirit within them? So, also, no one comprehends what God is, except the Spirit of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And as for us, it is not the spirit of the world that we have received, but the Spirit that comes from God, so that we may realize the blessings given to us by him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And we speak of these gifts, not in language taught by human philosophy, but in language taught by the Spirit, explaining spiritual things in spiritual words.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The merely intellectual person rejects the teaching of the Spirit of God; for to them it is mere folly; they cannot grasp it, because it is to be understood only by spiritual insight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But the person with spiritual insight is able to understand everything, although they themselves are understood by no one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For who has so comprehended the mind of the Lord as to be able to instruct him? We, however, have the mind of Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}But I, my friends, could not speak to you as people with spiritual insight, but only as worldly-minded \uc1\u8211* mere infants in the faith of Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I fed you with milk, not with solid food, for you were not then able to take it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 No, and even now you are not able; you are still worldly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}While there exist among you jealousy and party feeling, is it not true that you are worldly, and are acting merely as other people do?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When one says \uc1\u8220*I follow Paul,\uc1\u8221* and another \uc1\u8220*I follow Apollos,\uc1\u8221* aren\uc1\u8217*t you like other people?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}What, I ask, is Apollos? Or what is Paul? Servants through whom you were led to accept the faith; and that only as the Lord helped each of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I planted, and Apollos watered, but it was God who caused the growth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore neither the one who plants, nor the one who waters, counts for anything, but only God who causes the growth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In this the person who plants and the person who waters are one; yet each will receive their own reward in proportion to their own labour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For we are God\uc1\u8217*s fellow workers; you are God\uc1\u8217*s harvest field, God\uc1\u8217*s building.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}In fulfilment of the charge which God had entrusted to me, I laid the foundation like a skilful master; but someone else is now building on it. Let everyone take care how they build;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}for no one can lay any other foundation than the one already laid \uc1\u8211* Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Whatever is used by those who build on this foundation, whether gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, or straw,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}the quality of each man\uc1\u8217*s work will become known, for the day will make it plain; because that day is to be ushered in with fire, and the fire itself will test the quality of every man\uc1\u8217*s work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If anyone\uc1\u8217*s work, which they have built on that foundation, still remains, they will gain a reward.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If anyone\uc1\u8217*s work is burnt up, they will suffer loss; though they themselves will escape, but only as one who has passed through fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that you are God\uc1\u8217*s Temple, and that God\uc1\u8217*s Spirit has his home in you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If any one destroys the Temple of God, God will destroy them; for the Temple of God is sacred, and so also are you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Let no one deceive himself. If any one among you imagines that, as regards this world, they are wise, they should become a \uc1\u8220*fool,\uc1\u8221* that they may become wise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For in God\uc1\u8217*s sight this world\uc1\u8217*s wisdom is folly. Scripture tells of \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*One who catches the wise in their own craftiness,\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And it says again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord sees how fruitless are the deliberations of the wise.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore let no one boast about people; for all things are yours \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or the present, or the future \uc1\u8211* all things are yours!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But you are Christ\uc1\u8217*s and Christ is God\uc1\u8217*s.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Let people look on us as Christ\uc1\u8217*s servants, and as stewards of the hidden truths of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Now what we look for in stewards is that they should be trustworthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But it weighs very little with me that I am judged by you or by any human tribunal. No, I do not even judge myself;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for, though I am conscious of nothing against myself, that does not prove me innocent. It is the Lord who is my judge.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore do not pass judgment before the time, but wait until the Lord comes. He will throw light on what is now dark and obscure, and will reveal the motives in people\uc1\u8217*s minds; and then everyone will receive due praise from God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}All this, friends, I have, for your sakes, applied to Apollos and myself, so that, from our example, you may learn to observe the precept \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Keep to what is written,\uc1\u8221* that none of you may speak boastfully of one teacher to the disparagement of another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For who makes any one of you superior to others? And what have you that was not given you? But if you received it as a gift, why do you boast as if you had not?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Are you all so soon satisfied? Are you so soon rich? Have you begun to reign without us? Would indeed that you had, so that we also might reign with you!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For, as it seems to me, God has exhibited us, the apostles, last of all, as people doomed to death. We are made a spectacle to the universe, both to angels and to people!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}We, for Christ\uc1\u8217*s sake, are fools, but you, by your union with Christ, are people of discernment. We are weak, but you are strong. You are honoured, but we are despised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}To this very hour we go hungry, thirsty, and naked; we are beaten; we are homeless;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}we work hard, toiling with our own hands. We meet abuse with blessings, we meet persecution with endurance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}we meet slander with gentle appeals. We have been treated as the scum of the earth, the vilest of the vile, to this very hour.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It is with no wish to shame you that I am writing like this; but to warn you as my own dear children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Though you may have thousands of instructors in the faith of Christ, yet you have not many fathers. It was I who, through union with Christ Jesus, became your father by means of the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore I entreat you \uc1\u8211* Follow my example.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This is my reason for sending Timothy to you. He is my own dear faithful child in the Master\uc1\u8217*s service, and he will remind you of my methods of teaching the faith of Christ Jesus \uc1\u8211* methods which I follow everywhere in every church.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Some, I hear, are puffed up with pride, thinking that I am not coming to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But come to you I will, and that soon, if it please the Lord; and then I will find out, not what words these people use who are so puffed up, but what power they possess;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for the kingdom of God is based, not on words, but on power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}What do you wish? Am I to come to you with a rod, or in a loving and gentle spirit?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}There is a wide-spread report respecting a case of immorality among you, and that, too, of a kind that does not occur even among the Gentiles \uc1\u8211* a man, I hear, is living with his father\uc1\u8217*s wife!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Instead of grieving over it and taking steps for the expulsion of the man who has done this thing, is it possible that you are still puffed up?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For I myself, though absent in body, have been present with you in spirit, and in the name of our Lord Jesus I have already passed judgment, just as if I had been present, on the man who has acted in this way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I have decided \uc1\u8211* having been present in spirit at your meetings, when the power of the Lord Jesus was with us \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}to deliver such a man as this over to Satan, that what is sensual in him may be destroyed, so that his spirit may be saved at the day of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Your boasting is unseemly. Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that even a little yeast leavens all the dough?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Get rid entirely of the old leaven, so that you may be like new dough \uc1\u8211* free from leaven, as in truth you are. For our passover lamb is already sacrificed \uc1\u8211* Christ himself;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}therefore let us keep our festival, not with the leaven of former days, nor with the leaven of vice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I told you, in my letter, not to associate with immoral people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}not, of course, meaning people of the world who are in immoral, or who are covetous and grasping, or who worship idols; for then you would have to leave the world altogether.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But, as things are, I say that you are not to associate with anyone who, although a follower of Christ in name, is immoral, or covetous, or an idolater, or abusive, or a drunkard, or grasping \uc1\u8211* no, not even to sit down to eat with such people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}What have I to do with judging those outside the church? Is it not for you to judge those who are within the church,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}while God judges those who are outside? Put away the wicked from among you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Can it be that, when one of you has a dispute with another, they dare to have their case tried before the heathen, instead of before Christ\uc1\u8217*s people?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that Christ\uc1\u8217*s people will try the world? And if the world is to be tried by you, are you unfit to try the most trivial cases?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that we are to try angels \uc1\u8211* to say nothing of the affairs of this life?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Why, then, if you have cases relating to the affairs of this life, do you set to try them those who carry no weight with the church? To your shame I ask it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Can it be that there is not one among you wise enough to decide between two of their fellow followers?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Must a follower sue a fellow follower? In front of unbelievers?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To begin with, it is undoubtedly a loss to you to have lawsuits with one another. Why not rather let yourselves be wronged? Why not rather let yourselves be cheated?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Instead of this, you wrong and cheat others yourselves \uc1\u8211* yes, even other followers!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that wrongdoers will have no share in God\uc1\u8217*s kingdom? Do not be deceived. No one who is immoral, or an idolater, or an adulterer, or licentious, or a sexual pervert,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}or a thief, or covetous, or a drunkard, or abusive, or grasping, will have any share in God\uc1\u8217*s kingdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Such some of you used to be; but you washed yourselves clean. You became Christ\uc1\u8217*s people! You were pronounced righteous through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the Spirit of our God!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Everything is allowable for me! Yes, but everything is not profitable. Everything is allowable for me! Yes, but for my part, I will not let myself be enslaved by anything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Food exists for the stomach, and the stomach for food; but God will put an end to both the one and the other. The body, however, exists, not for immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and, as God has raised the Lord, so he will raise us up also by the exercise of his power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that your bodies are Christ\uc1\u8217*s members? Am I, then, to take the members that belong to the Christ and make them the members of a prostitute? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Or don\uc1\u8217*t you know that a man who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body (for \uc1\u8220*the two,\uc1\u8221* it is said, \uc1\u8220*will become one\uc1\u8221*);{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}while a man who is united with the Lord is one with him in spirit?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Shun all immorality. Every other sin that people commit is something outside the body; but an immoral person sins against their own body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Again, don\uc1\u8217*t you know that your body is a shrine of the Holy Spirit that is within you \uc1\u8211* the Spirit which you have from God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Moreover, you are not your own masters; you were bought, and the price was paid. Therefore, honour God in your bodies.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Answers to Questions Asked by the Church at Corinth

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}With reference to the subjects about which you wrote to me: It is good for a man to remain single.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But, owing to the prevalence of immorality, I advise every man to have his own wife, and every woman her husband.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}A husband should give his wife her due, and a wife her husband.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}It is not the wife, but the husband, who exercises power over her body; and so, too, it is not the husband, but the wife, who exercises power over his body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Do not deprive each other of what is due \uc1\u8211* unless it is only for a time and by mutual consent, so that your minds may be free for prayer until you again live as man and wife \uc1\u8211* otherwise Satan might take advantage of your want of self-control and tempt you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I say this, however, as a concession, not as a command.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I should wish everyone to be just what I am myself. But everyone has his own gift from God \uc1\u8211* one in one way, and one in another.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}My advice, then, to those who are not married, and to widows, is this: It would be good for them to remain as I am myself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But, if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to be consumed with passion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}To those who are married my direction is \uc1\u8211* yet it is not mine, but the Master\uc1\u8217*s \uc1\u8211* that a woman is not to leave her husband{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}(If she has done so, she should remain as she is, or else be reconciled to her husband) and also that a man is not to divorce his wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}To all others I say \uc1\u8211* I, not the Master \uc1\u8211* If a follower of the Lord is married to a woman, who is an unbeliever but willing to live with him, he should not divorce her;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and a woman who is married to a man, who is an unbeliever but willing to live with her, should not divorce her husband.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For, through his wife, the husband who is an unbeliever has become associated with Christ\uc1\u8217*s people; and the wife who is an unbeliever has become associated with Christ\uc1\u8217*s people through the Lord\uc1\u8217*s follower whom she has married. Otherwise your children would be \uc1\u8220*defiled,\uc1\u8221* but, as it is, they belong to Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}However, if the unbeliever wishes to be separated, let them be so. Under such circumstances neither is bound; God has called you to live in peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}How can you tell, wife, whether you may not save your husband? And how can you tell, husband, whether you may not save your wife?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In any case, a person should continue to live in the condition which the Lord has allotted to them, and in which they were when God called them. This is the rule that I lay down in every church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Was a man already circumcised when he was called? Then he should not efface his circumcision. Has a man been called when uncircumcised? Then he should not be circumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Circumcision is nothing; the want of it is nothing; but to keep the commands of God is everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Let everyone remain in that condition of life in which they were when the call came to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Were you a slave when you were called? Do not let that trouble you. No, even if you are able to gain your freedom, still do your best.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For the person who was a slave when they were called to the master\uc1\u8217*s service is the Master\uc1\u8217*s freedman; so, too, the person who was free when called is Christ\uc1\u8217*s slave.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}You were bought, and the price was paid. Do not let yourselves become slaves to people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Friends, let everyone remain in the condition in which they were when they were called, in close communion with God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}With regard to unmarried women, I have no command from the Master to give you, but I tell you my opinion, and the Master in his mercy has made me worthy to be trusted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I think, then, that, in view of the time of suffering that has now come upon us, what I have already said is best \uc1\u8211* that a man should remain as he is.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Are you married to a wife? Then do not seek to be separated. Are you separated from a wife? Then do not seek for a wife.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Still, if you should marry, that is not wrong; nor, if a young woman marries, is that wrong. But those who marry will have much trouble to bear, and my wish is to spare you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}What I mean, friends, is this \uc1\u8211* the time is short. Meanwhile, let those who have wives live as if they had none,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}those who are weeping as if not weeping, those who are rejoicing as if not rejoicing, those who buy as if not possessing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}and those who use the good things of the world as using them sparingly; for this world as we see it is passing away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}I want you to be free from anxiety. The unmarried man is anxious about the Master\uc1\u8217*s cause, desiring to please him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}while the married man is anxious about worldly matters, desiring to please his wife;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}and so his interests are divided. Again, the unmarried woman, whether she is old or young, is anxious about the Master\uc1\u8217*s cause, striving to be pure both in body and in spirit, while the married woman is anxious about worldly matters, desiring to please her husband.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}I say this for your own benefit, not with any intention of putting a halter round your necks, but in order to secure for the Master seemly and constant devotion, free from all distraction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}If, however, a father thinks that he is not acting fairly by his unmarried daughter, when she is past her youth, and if under these circumstances her marriage ought to take place, he should act as he thinks right. He is doing nothing wrong \uc1\u8211* let the marriage take place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}On the other hand, a father, who has definitely made up his mind, and is under no compulsion, but is free to carry out his own wishes, and who has come to the decision, in his own mind, to keep his unmarried daughter at home will be doing right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}In short, the one who consents to his daughter\uc1\u8217*s marriage is doing right, and yet the other will be doing better.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives; but, if the husband should pass to his rest, the widow is free to marry anyone she wishes, provided he is a believer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Yet she will be happier if she remains as she is \uc1\u8211* in my opinion, for I think that I also have the Spirit of God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}With reference to food that has been offered in sacrifice to idols \uc1\u8211* We are aware that all of us have knowledge! Knowledge breeds conceit, while love builds up character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If someone thinks that they know anything, they have not yet reached that knowledge which they ought to have reached.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On the other hand, if a person loves God, they are known by God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}With reference, then, to eating food that has been offered to idols \uc1\u8211* we are aware that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Even supposing that there are so-called \uc1\u8220*gods\uc1\u8221* either in heaven or on earth \uc1\u8211* and there are many such \uc1\u8220*gods\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*lords\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yet for us there is only one God, the Father, from whom all things come (and for him we live), and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things come (and through him we live).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Still, it is not everyone that has this knowledge. Some people, because of their association with idols, continued down to the present time, eat the food as food offered to an idol; and their consciences, while still weak, are dulled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}What we eat, however, will not bring us nearer to God. We lose nothing by not eating this food, and we gain nothing by eating it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But take care that this right of yours does not become in any way a stumbling-block to the weak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For if someone should see you who possess this knowledge, feasting in an idol\uc1\u8217*s temple, will not their conscience, if they are weak, become so hardened that they, too, will eat food offered to idols?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And so, through this knowledge of yours, the weak person is ruined \uc1\u8211* someone for whose sake Christ died!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}In this way, by sinning against your fellow followers of the Lord and injuring their consciences, while still weak, you sin against Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore, if what I eat makes a follower of the Lord fall, rather than make them fall, I will never eat meat again.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen our Lord Jesus? Aren\uc1\u8217*t you yourselves my work achieved in union with the Lord?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If I am not an apostle to others, yet at least I am to you; for you are the seal that stamps me as an apostle in union with the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The defence that I make to my critics is this:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Haven\uc1\u8217*t we a right to food and drink?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Haven\uc1\u8217*t we a right to take a wife with us, if she is a Christian, as the other apostles and the Master\uc1\u8217*s brothers and Cephas all do?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Or is it only Barnabas and I who have no right to give up working for our bread?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Does anyone ever serve as a soldier at his own expense? Does anyone plant a vineyard and not eat its produce? Or does anyone look after a herd and not drink the milk?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Am I, in all this, speaking only from the human standpoint? Does not the Law also say the same?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For in the Law of Moses it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You should not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 Is it the bullocks that God is thinking of?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Or is not is said entirely for our sakes? Surely it was written for our sakes, for the ploughman ought not to plough, nor the thrasher to thrash, without expecting a share of the grain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Since we, then, sowed spiritual seed for you, is it too much that we should reap from you an earthly harvest?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}If others share in this right over you, don\uc1\u8217*t we even more? Still we did not avail ourselves of this right. No, we endure anything rather than impede the progress of the good news of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that those who do the work of the Temple live on what comes from the Temple, and that those who serve at the altar share the offerings with the altar?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}So, too, the Master has appointed that those who tell the good news should get their living from the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I, however, have not availed myself of any of these rights. I am not saying this to secure such an arrangement for myself; indeed, I would far rather die \uc1\u8211* Nobody will make my boast a vain one!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If I proclaim the good news, I have nothing to boast of, for I am compelled to do so. Woe is me if I do not share it!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If I do this work willingly, I have a reward; but, if unwillingly, I have been charged to perform a duty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}What is my reward, then? To present the good news free of all cost, and so make but a sparing use of the rights which it gives me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Although I was entirely free, yet, to win as many converts as possible, I made myself everyone\uc1\u8217*s slave.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}To the Jews I became like a Jew, to win Jews. To those who are subject to Law I became like a man subject to Law \uc1\u8211* though I was not myself subject to Law \uc1\u8211* to win those who are subject to Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}To those who have no Law I became like a man who has no Law \uc1\u8211* not that I am free from God\uc1\u8217*s Law; no, for I am under Christ\uc1\u8217*s Law \uc1\u8211* to win those who have no law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}To the weak I became weak, to win the weak. I have become all things to all people, so as at all costs to save some.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}And I do everything for the sake of the good news, so that with them I may share in its blessings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that on a racecourse, though all run, yet only one wins the prize? Run in such a way that you may win.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Every athlete exercises self-restraint in everything; they, indeed, for a crown that fades, we for one that is unfading.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}I, therefore, do not run aimlessly. I do not box like a man hitting the air.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}No, I bruise my body and make it my slave, so that I, who have called others to the contest, will not myself be rejected.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}I want you to bear in mind, friends, that all our ancestors were beneath the cloud, and all passed through the sea;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}that in the cloud and in the sea they all underwent baptism as followers of Moses;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and that they all ate the same supernatural food,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and all drank the same supernatural water, for they used to drink from a supernatural rock which followed them, and that rock was the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet with most of them God was displeased; for they were struck down in the desert.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Now these things happened as warnings to us, to teach us not to long for evil things as our ancestors longed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Do not become idolaters, as some of them became. Scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The people sat down to eat and drink, and stood up to dance.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Nor let us act immorally, as some of them acted, with the result that twenty-three thousand of them fell dead in a single day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Nor let us try the patience of the Lord too far, as some of them tried it, with the result that they were, one after another, destroyed by snakes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And do not murmur, as some of them murmured, and so were destroyed by the angel of death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}These things happened to them by way of warning, and were recorded to serve as a caution to us, in whose days the close of the ages has come.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore let the person who thinks that they stand take care that they do not fall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No temptation has come upon you that is not common to all humanity. God will not fail you, and he will not allow you to be tempted beyond your strength; but, when he sends the temptation, he will also provide the way of escape, so that you may have strength to endure.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore, my dear friends, shun the worship of idols.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I speak to you as man of discernment; form your own judgment about what I am saying.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}In the cup of blessing which we bless, is not there a sharing in the blood of the Christ? And in the bread which we break, is not there a sharing in the body of the Christ?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The bread is one, and we, though many, are one body; for we all partake of that one bread.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Look at the people of Israel. Do not those who eat the sacrifices share with the altar?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}What do I mean? That an offering made to an idol, or the idol itself, is anything?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}No; what I say is that the sacrifices offered by the Gentiles are offered to demons and to a being who is no God, and I do not want you to share with demons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}You cannot drink both the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot partake at the table of the Lord and at the table of demons.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Or are we to rouse the jealousy of the Lord? Are we stronger than he?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Everything is allowable! Yes, but everything is not profitable. Everything is allowable! Yes, but everything does not build up character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}A person must not study their own interests, but the interests of others.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Eat anything that is sold in the market, without making inquiries to satisfy your scruples;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}for the earth, with all that is in it, belongs to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}If an unbeliever invites you to his house and you consent to go, eat anything that is put before you, without making inquiries to satisfy your scruples.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}But, if anyone should say to you \uc1\u8220*This has been offered in sacrifice to an idol,\uc1\u8221* then, for the sake of the speaker and his scruples, do not eat it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}I do not say your scruples, but his. For why should the freedom that I claim be condemned by the scruples of another?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}If, for my part, I take the food thankfully, why should I be abused for eating that for which I give thanks?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Whether, then, you eat or drink or whatever you do, do everything to the honour of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Do not cause offence either to Jews or Greeks or to the church of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}for I, also, try to please everybody in everything, not seeking my own advantage, but do what is best for others, so that they may be saved.{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Imitate me, as I myself imitate Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I praise you, indeed, because you never forget me, and are keeping my injunctions in mind, exactly as I laid them on you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But I am anxious that you should understand that the Christ is the head of every man, that man is the head of woman, and that God is the head of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Any man who keeps his head covered, when praying or preaching in public, dishonours him who is his head;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}while any woman, who prays or preaches in public bare-headed, dishonours him who is her head; for that is to make herself like one of the shameless women who shave their heads.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Indeed, if a woman does not keep her head covered, she may as well cut her hair short. But, since to cut her hair short, or shave it off, marks her as one of the shameless women, she should keep her head covered.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}A man ought not to have his head covered, for he has been from the beginning the likeness of God and the reflection of his glory, but woman is the reflection of man\uc1\u8217*s glory.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For it was not man who was taken from woman, but woman who was taken from man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Besides, man was not created for the sake of woman, but woman for the sake of man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And, therefore, a woman ought to wear on her head a symbol of her subjection, because of the presence of the angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Still, when in union with the Lord, woman is not independent of man, or man of woman;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}for just as woman came from man, so man comes by means of woman; and all things come from God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Judge for yourselves. Is it fitting that a woman should pray to God in public with her head uncovered?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Does not nature herself teach us that, while for a man to wear his hair long is degrading to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}a woman\uc1\u8217*s long hair is her glory? Her hair has been given her to serve as a covering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If, however, anyone still thinks it right to contest the point \uc1\u8211* well, we have no such custom, nor have the churches of God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In giving directions on the next subject, I cannot praise you; because your meetings do more harm than good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}To begin with, I am told that when you meet together as a church there are divisions among you. In part I believe this,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}indeed, there must be parties among you, so that the people of real worth become known.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}When you meet together, as I understand, it is not possible to eat the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Supper;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for, as you eat, each of you tries to secure his own supper first, with the result that one has too little to eat, and another has too much to drink!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Have you no houses in which you can eat and drink? Or are you trying to show your contempt for the church of God, and to humiliate the poor? What can I say to you? Should I praise you? In this matter I cannot praise you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For I myself received from the Lord the account which I have in turn given to you \uc1\u8211* how the Lord Jesus, on the very night of his betrayal, took some bread,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke it and said \uc1\u8216*This is my own body given on your behalf. Do this in memory of me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And in the same way with the cup, after supper, saying \uc1\u8216*This cup is the new covenant made by my blood. Do this, whenever you drink it, in memory of me.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For whenever you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord\uc1\u8217*s death \uc1\u8211* until he comes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Therefore, whoever eats the bread, or drinks the Lord\uc1\u8217*s cup, in an irreverent spirit, will have to answer for an offence against the Lord\uc1\u8217*s body and blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Let everyone look into their own heart, and only then eat of the bread and drink from the cup.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For the person who eats and drinks brings a judgment on themselves by their eating and drinking, when they do not discern the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}That is why so many among you are weak and ill, and why some are sleeping.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}But, if we judged ourselves rightly, we should not be judged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Yet, in being judged by the Lord, we are undergoing discipline, so that we may not have judgment passed on us with the rest of the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Therefore, my friends, when you meet together to eat the Supper, wait for one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}If anyone is hungry, they should eat at home, so that your meetings may not bring a judgment on you. The other details I will settle when I come.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}In the next place, friends, I do not want you to be ignorant about spiritual gifts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You know that there was a time when you were Gentiles, going astray after idols that could not speak, just as you happened to be led.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore I tell you plainly that no one who speaks under the influence of the Spirit of God says \uc1\u8220*JESUS IS ACCURSED,\uc1\u8221* and that no one can say \uc1\u8220*JESUS IS LORD,\uc1\u8221* except under the influence of the Holy Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Gifts differ, but the Spirit is the same;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}ways of serving differ, yet the Master is the same;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}results differ, yet the God who brings about every result is in every case the same.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}To each of us there is given spiritual illumination for the general good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}To one is given the power to speak with wisdom through the Spirit; to another the power to speak with knowledge, due to the same Spirit;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}to another faith by the same Spirit; to another power to cure diseases by the one Spirit; to another supernatural powers;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}to another the gift of preaching; to another the gift of distinguishing between true and false inspiration; to another varieties of the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221*; to another the power to interpret \uc1\u8220*tongues.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}All these result from one and the same Spirit, who distributes his gifts to each individually as he wills.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For just as the human body is one whole, and yet has many parts, and all its parts, many though they are, form but one body, so it is with the Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}for it was by one Spirit that we were all baptized to form one body, whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free, and were all imbued with one Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The human body, I repeat, consists not of one part, but of many.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If the foot says \uc1\u8220*Since I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body,\uc1\u8221* it does not because of that cease to belong to the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Or if the ear says \uc1\u8220*Since I am not an eye, I do not belong to the body,\uc1\u8221* it does not because of that cease to belong to the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If all the body were an eye, where would the hearing be? If it were all hearing, where would the sense of smell be?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But in fact God has placed each individual part just where he thought fit in the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}If, however, they all made up only one part, where would the body be?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But in fact, although it has many parts, there is only one body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The eye cannot say to the hand \uc1\u8220*I do not need you,\uc1\u8221* nor, again, the head to the feet \uc1\u8220*I do not need you.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}No! Those parts of the body that seem naturally the weaker are indispensable;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and those parts which we deem less honourable we surround with special honour; and our ungraceful parts receive a special grace which our graceful parts do not require.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yes, God has so constructed the body \uc1\u8211* by giving a special honour to the part that lacks it \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}As to secure that there should be no disunion in the body, but that the parts should show the same care for one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}If one part suffers, all the others suffer with it, and if one part has honour done to it, all the others share its joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Together you are the body of Christ, and individually its parts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}In the church God has appointed, first, apostles, secondly preachers, thirdly teachers; then he has given supernatural powers, then power to cure diseases, aptness for helping others, capacity to govern, varieties of the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Can everyone be an apostle? Can everyone be a preacher? Can everyone be a teacher? Can everyone have supernatural powers?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Can everyone have power to cure diseases? Can everyone speak in \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221*? Can everyone interpret them?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Strive for the greater gifts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Yet I can still show you a way beyond all comparison the best.{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Though I speak in the \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221* of people, or even of angels, yet have not love, I have become mere echoing brass, or a clanging cymbal!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Even though I have the gift of preaching, and fathom all hidden truths and all the depths of knowledge; even though I have such faith as might move mountains, yet have not love, I am nothing!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Even though I dole my substance to the poor, even though I sacrifice my body in order to boast, yet have not love, it avails me nothing!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Love is long-suffering, and kind; love is never envious, never boastful, never conceited, never behaves unbecomingly;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}love is never self-seeking, never provoked, never reckons up her wrongs;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}love never rejoices at evil, but rejoices in the triumph of truth;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}love bears with all things, ever trustful, ever hopeful, ever patient.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Love never fails. But, whether it be the gift of preaching, it will end; whether it be the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* it will cease; whether it be knowledge, it, too, will vanish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For our knowledge is incomplete, and our preaching is incomplete,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but, when the perfect has come, that which is incomplete will end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When I was a child, I talked as a child, I felt as a child, I reasoned as a child; now that I am a man, I have done with childish ways.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As yet we see, in a mirror, dimly, but then \uc1\u8211* face to face! As yet my knowledge is incomplete, but then I will know in full, as I have been fully known.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Meanwhile faith, hope, and love endure \uc1\u8211* these three, but the greatest of these is love.{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Seek this love earnestly, and strive for spiritual gifts, above all for the gift of preaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The person who, when speaking, uses the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221* is speaking, not to people, but to God, for no one understands them; yet in spirit they are speaking of hidden truths.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But those who preach are speaking to their fellow men and women words that will build up faith, and give them comfort and encouragement.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Those who, when speaking, use the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221* builds up their own faith, while those who preach build up the faith of the church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now I want you all to speak in \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* but much more I wish that you should preach. A preacher is worth more than one who speaks in \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* unless they interprets their words, so that the faith of the church may be built up.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}This being so, friends, what good will I do you, if I come to you and speak in \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* unless my words convey some revelation, or knowledge, or take the form of preaching or teaching?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Even with inanimate things, such as a flute or a harp, though they produce sounds, yet unless the notes are quite distinct, how can the tune played on the flute or the harp be recognised?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}If the bugle sounds a doubtful call, who will prepare for battle?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And so with you; unless, in using the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* you utter intelligible words, how can what you say be understood? You will be speaking to the winds!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}There are, for instance, a certain number of different languages in the world, and not one of them fails to convey meaning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If, however, I do not happen to know the language, I will be a foreigner to those who speak it, and they will be foreigners to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so with you; since you are striving for spiritual gifts, be eager to excel in such as will build up the faith of the church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore anyone who, when speaking, uses the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221* should pray for ability to interpret them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If, when praying, I use the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* my spirit indeed prays, but my mind is a blank.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}What, then, is my conclusion? Simply this \uc1\u8211* I will pray with my spirit, but with my mind as well; I will sing with my spirit, but with my mind as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If you bless God with your spirit only, how can people in the congregation who are without your gift say \uc1\u8220*Amen\uc1\u8221* to your thanksgiving? They do not know what you are saying!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Your thanksgiving may be excellent, but the other is not helped by it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Thank God, I use the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221* more than any of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}But at a meeting of the church I would rather speak five words with my mind, and so teach others, than ten thousand words when using the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}My friends, do not show yourselves children in understanding. In wickedness be infants, but in understanding show yourselves adults.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It is said in the Law \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*In strange tongues and by the lips of strangers will I speak to this people, but even then they will not listen to me, says the Lord.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore the gift of the \uc1\u8220*tongues\uc1\u8221* is intended as a sign, not for those who believe in Christ, but for those who do not, while the gift of preaching is intended as a sign, not for those who do not believe in Christ, but for those who do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}So, when the whole church meets, if all present use the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* and some people who are without the gift, or who are unbelievers, come in, will not they say that you are mad?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}While, if all those present use the gift of preaching, and an unbeliever, or someone without the gift, comes in, they are convinced of their sinfulness by them all, they are called to account by them all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}the secrets of their heart are revealed, and then, throwing themselves on their face, they will worship God, and declare \uc1\u8220*God is indeed among you!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}What do I suggest, then, friends? Whenever you meet for worship, each of you comes, either with a hymn, or a lesson, or a revelation, or the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* or the interpretation of them; let everything be directed to the building up of faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}If any of you use the gift of \uc1\u8220*tongues,\uc1\u8221* not more than two, or at the most three, should do so \uc1\u8211* each speaking in his turn \uc1\u8211* and someone should interpret them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}If there is no one able to interpret what is said, they should remain silent at the meeting of the church, and speak to themselves and to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Of preachers two or three should speak, and the rest should weigh well what is said.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But, if some revelation is made to another person as he sits there, the first speaker should stop.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}For you can all preach in turn, so that all may learn some lesson and all receive encouragement.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}(The spirit that moves the preachers is within the preachers\uc1\u8217* control;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}for God is not a God of disorder, but of peace.) This custom prevails in all the churches of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}At the meetings of the church married women should remain silent, for they are not allowed to speak in public; they should take a subordinate place, as the Law itself directs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}If they want information on any point, they should ask their husbands about it at home; for it is unbecoming for a married woman to speak at a meeting of the church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}What! Did God\uc1\u8217*s message to the world originate with you? Or did it find its way to none but you?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}If anyone thinks that he has the gift of preaching or any other spiritual gift, he should recognise that what I am now saying to you is a command from the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}Anyone who ignores it may be ignored.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Therefore, my friends, strive for the gift of preaching, and yet do not forbid speaking in \uc1\u8220*tongues.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}Let everything be done in a proper and orderly manner.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle\uc1\u8217*s Teaching as to the Resurrection of the Dead

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}Next, friends, I would like to remind you of the good news which I told you, and which you received \uc1\u8211* the good news on which you have taken your stand,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and by means of which you are being saved. I would like to remind you of the words that I used in telling it to you, since you are still holding fast to it, and since it was not in vain that you became believers in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For at the very beginning of my teaching I gave you the account which I had myself received \uc1\u8211* that Christ died for our sins (as the scriptures had foretold),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}that he was buried, that on the third day he was raised (as the scriptures had foretold),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and that he appeared to Cephas, and then to the Twelve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of his followers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have gone to their rest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}After that, he appeared to James, and then to all the apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Last of all, he appeared even to me, who am, as it were, a miscarried baby \uc1\u8211* born untimely.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For I am the least of the apostles, I who am unworthy of the name of \uc1\u8220*apostle,\uc1\u8221* because I persecuted the church of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But it is through the love of God that I am what I am, and the love that he showed me has not been wasted. No, I have toiled harder than any of them, and yet it was not I, but the love of God working with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Whether, then, it was I or whether it was they, this we proclaim, and this you believed.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Now, if it is proclaimed of Christ that he has been raised from the dead, how is it that some of you say that there is no such thing as a resurrection of the dead?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But, if there is no such thing as a resurrection of the dead, then even Christ has not been raised;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and, if Christ has not been raised, then our proclamation is without meaning, and our faith without meaning also!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Yes, and we are being proved to have borne false testimony about God; for we testified of God that he raised the Christ, whom he did not raise, if, indeed, the dead do not rise!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For, if the dead do not rise, then even Christ himself has not been raised,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and, if Christ has not been raised, your faith is folly \uc1\u8211* your sins are on you still!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Yes, and they, who have passed to their rest in union with Christ, perished!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}If all that we have done has been to place our hope in Christ for this life, then we of all people are the most to be pitied.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But, in truth, Christ has been raised from the dead, the first-fruits of those who are at rest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For, since through a man there is death, so, too, through a man there is a resurrection of the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For, as through union with Adam all die, so through union with the Christ will all be made to live.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But each in their proper order \uc1\u8211* Christ the first-fruits; afterwards, at his coming, those who belong to the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Then will come the end \uc1\u8211* when he surrenders the kingdom to his God and Father, having overthrown all other rule and all other authority and power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}For he must reign until God \uc1\u8220*has put all his enemies under his feet.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}The last enemy to be overthrown is death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}for God has placed all things under Christ\uc1\u8217*s feet. (But, when it is said that all things have been placed under Christ, it is plain that God is excepted who placed everything under him.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And, when everything has been placed under him, the Son will place himself under God who placed everything under him, so that God may be all in all!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Again, what good will they be doing who are baptized on behalf of the dead? If it is true that the dead do not rise, why are people baptized on their behalf?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Why, too, do we risk our lives every hour?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Daily I face death \uc1\u8211* I swear it, friends, by the pride in you that I feel through my union with Christ Jesus, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}If with only human hopes I had fought in the arena at Ephesus, what should I have gained by it? If the dead do not rise, then let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Do not be deceived.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Good character is marred by evil company.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}Wake up to a righteous life, and cease to sin. There are some who have no true knowledge of God. I speak in this way to shame you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Someone, however, may ask \uc1\u8220*How do the dead rise? And in what body will they come?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}You foolish person! The seed you yourself sow does not come to life, unless it dies!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}And when you sow, you sow not the body that will be, but a mere grain \uc1\u8211* perhaps of wheat, or something else.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}God gives it the body that he pleases \uc1\u8211* to each seed its special body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}All forms of life are not the same; there is one for people, another for beasts, another for birds, and another for fish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}There are heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but the beauty of the heavenly bodies is not the beauty of the earthly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 41}There is a beauty of the sun, and a beauty of the moon, and a beauty of the stars; for even star differs from star in beauty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 42}It is the same with the resurrection of the dead. Sown a mortal body, it rises immortal; sown disfigured, it rises beautiful;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 43}sown weak, it rises strong; sown a human body, it rises a spiritual body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 44}As surely as there is a human body, there is also a spiritual body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 45}That is what is meant by the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Adam, the first man, became a human being\uc1\u8221*; the last Adam became a life-giving spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 46}That which comes first is not the spiritual, but the human; afterwards comes the spiritual;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 47}the first man was from the dust of the earth; the second man from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 48}Those who are of the dust are like him who came from the dust; and those who are of heaven are like him who came from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 49}And as we have borne the likeness of him who came from the dust, so let us bear the likeness of him who came from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 50}This I say, friends \uc1\u8211* Flesh and blood can have no share in the kingdom of God, nor can the perishable share the imperishable.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 51}Listen, I will tell you God\uc1\u8217*s hidden purpose! We will not all have passed to our rest, but we will all be transformed \uc1\u8211* in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 52}at the last trumpet-call; for the trumpet will sound, and the dead will rise immortal, and we, also, will be transformed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 53}For this perishable body of ours must put on an imperishable form, and this dying body a deathless form.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 54}And, when this dying body has put on its deathless form, then indeed will the words of scripture come true \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 55}\uc1\u8220*death has been swallowed up in victory! Where, Death, is your victory? Where, death, is your sting?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 56}It is sin that gives death its sting, and it is the Law that gives sin its power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 57}But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 58}Therefore, my dear friends, stand firm, unshaken, always diligent in the Lord\uc1\u8217*s work, for you know that, in union with him, your toil is not in vain.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}With reference to the collection for Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, I want you to follow the instructions that I gave to the churches in Galatia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}On the first day of every week each of you should put by what he can afford, so that no collections need be made after I have come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}On my arrival, I will send any persons, whom you may authorise by letter, to carry your gift to Jerusalem;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and, if it appears to be worth while for me to go also, they will go with me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I will come to you as soon as I have been through Macedonia \uc1\u8211* for I am going through Macedonia \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And I will probably make some stay with you or, perhaps, remain for the winter, so that you may yourselves send me on my way, wherever I may be going.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I do not propose to pay you a visit in passing now, for I hope to stay with you for some time, if the Lord permits.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I intend, however, staying at Ephesus until the Festival at the close of the Harvest;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}for a great opening for active work has presented itself, and there are many opponents.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If Timothy comes, take care that he has no cause for feeling anxious while he is with you. He is doing the Master\uc1\u8217*s work no less than I am.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}No one, therefore, should slight him. See him safely on his way to me, for I am expecting him with some of our friends.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As for our friend Apollos, I have often urged him to go to you with the others. He has, however, been very unwilling to do so as yet; but he will go as soon as he finds a good opportunity.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Be watchful; stand firm in your faith; be brave; be strong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Let everything you do be done in a loving spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I have another request to make of you, friends. You remember Stephanas and his household, and that they were the first-fruits gathered in from Greece, and set themselves to serve Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I want you, on your part, to show deference to such people as these, as well as to every fellow labourer and earnest worker.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I am glad Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus have come, for they have made up for your absence;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}they have cheered my heart, and your hearts also. Recognise the worth of such people as these.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The churches in Roman Asia send you their greetings. Aquila and Prisca and the church that meets at their house send you many Christian greetings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}All of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers send you greetings. Greet one another with a sacred kiss.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I, Paul, add this greeting in my own handwriting.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Accursed be anyone who has no love for the Lord. THE LORD IS COMING.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}May the blessing of the Lord Jesus be with you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}My love to all of you who are in union with Christ Jesus.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 Corinthians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Second Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Corinthians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To the church of God in Corinth, and to all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people throughout Greece, from Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, by the will of God, and from Timothy, who is also a follower.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Blessed is the God and Father of Jesus Christ our Lord, the all-merciful Father, the God ever ready to console,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}who consoles us in all our troubles, so that we may be able to console those who are in any trouble with the consolation that we ourselves receive from him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It is true that we have our full share of the sufferings of the Christ, but through the Christ we have also our full share of consolation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}If we meet with trouble, it is for the sake of your consolation and salvation; and, if we find consolation, it is for the sake of the consolation that you will experience when you are called to endure the sufferings that we ourselves are enduring;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and our hope for you remains unshaken. We know that, as you are sharing our sufferings, you will also share our consolation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}We want you, friends, to know that, in the troubles which befell us in Roman Asia, we were burdened altogether beyond our strength, so much so that we even despaired of life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Indeed, we had the presentiment that we must die, so that we might rely, not on ourselves, but on God who raises the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And from so imminent a death God delivered us, and will deliver us again; for in him we have placed our hopes of future deliverance, while you, also, help us by your prayers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And then many lips will give thanks on our behalf for the blessing granted us in answer to many prayers.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle\uc1\u8217*s Relations with his Converts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Indeed, our main ground for satisfaction is this \uc1\u8211* Our conscience tells us that our conduct in the world, and still more in our relations with you, was marked by a purity of motive and a sincerity that were inspired by God, and was based, not on worldly policy, but on the help of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}We never write anything to you other than what you will acknowledge to the very end \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And, indeed, you have already partly acknowledged it about us \uc1\u8211* that you have a right to be proud of us, as we will be proud of you, on the day of our Lord Jesus.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}With this conviction in my mind, I planned to come to see you first, so that your pleasure might be doubled \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To visit you both on my way to Macedonia, and to come to you again on my return from Macedonia, and then to get you to send me on my way into Judea.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As this was my plan, where, pray, did I show any fickleness of purpose? Or do you think that my plans are formed on mere impulse, so that in the same breath I say \uc1\u8220*Yes\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*No\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As God is true, the message that we brought you does not waver between \uc1\u8220*Yes\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*No\uc1\u8221*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The Son of God, Christ Jesus, whom we \uc1\u8211* Silas, Timothy, and I \uc1\u8211* proclaimed among you, never wavered between \uc1\u8220*Yes\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*No.\uc1\u8221* With him it has always been \uc1\u8220*Yes.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For, many as were the promises of God, in Christ is the \uc1\u8220*Yes\uc1\u8221* that fulfils them. Therefore, through Christ again, let the \uc1\u8220*Amen\uc1\u8221* rise, through us, to the glory of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}God who brings us, with you, into close union with Christ, and who consecrated us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}also set his seal on us, and gave us his Spirit in our hearts as a pledge of future blessings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But, as my life will answer for it, I call God to witness that it was to spare you that I deferred my visit to Corinth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}I do not mean that we are to dictate to you with regard to your faith; on the contrary, we work with you for your true happiness; indeed, it is through your faith that you are standing firm.{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}For my own sake, as well, I decided not to pay you another painful visit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}If it is I who cause you pain, why, who is there to cheer me, except the person whom I am paining?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So I wrote as I did because I was afraid that if I had come, I should have been pained by those who ought to have made me glad; for I felt sure that it was true of you all that my joy was in every case yours also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I wrote to you in sore trouble and distress of heart and with many tears, not to give you pain, but to let you see how intense a love I have for you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now whoever has caused the pain has not so much pained me, as he has, to some extent \uc1\u8211* not to be too severe \uc1\u8211* pained every one of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The man to whom I refer has been sufficiently punished by the penalty inflicted by the majority of you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}so that now you must take the opposite course, and forgive and encourage him, or else he may be overwhelmed by the intensity of his pain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So I entreat you to assure him of your love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I had this further object, also, in what I wrote \uc1\u8211* to find out whether you might be relied on to be obedient in everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Anyone you forgive, I forgive them, too. Indeed, for my part, whatever I have forgiven (if I have had to forgive anything), I have forgiven for your sakes, in the presence of Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}so as to prevent Satan from taking advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}When I went to the district round Troas to tell the good news of the Christ, even though there was an opening for serving the Master,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I could get no peace of mind because I failed to find Titus, my friend; so I took leave of the people there, and went on to Macedonia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}All thanks to God, who, through our union with the Christ, leads us in one continual triumph, and uses us to spread the sweet perfume of the knowledge of him in every place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For we are the fragrance of Christ ascending to God \uc1\u8211* both among those who are in the path of salvation and among those who are in the path to ruin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}To the latter we are a stench which arises from death and tells of death; to the former a fragrance which arises from life and tells of life. But who is equal to such a task?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Unlike many people, we are not in the habit of making profit out of God\uc1\u8217*s message; but in all sincerity, and bearing God\uc1\u8217*s commission, we speak before him in union with Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or are we like some who need letters of commendation to you, or from you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You yourselves are our letter \uc1\u8211* a letter written on our hearts, and one which everybody can read and understand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}All can see that you are a letter from Christ delivered by us, a letter written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone, but on tablets of human hearts.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Ministry of the Apostles

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}This, then, is the confidence in regard to God that we have gained through the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I do not mean that we are fit to form any judgment by ourselves, as if on our own authority;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}our fitness comes from God, who himself made us fit to be assistants of a new covenant, of which the substance is, not a written Law, but a Spirit. For the written Law means death, but the Spirit gives life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If the system of religion which involved death, embodied in a written Law and engraved on stones, began amid such glory, that the Israelites were unable to gaze at the face of Moses because of its glory, though it was but a passing glory,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}will not the religion that confers the Spirit have still greater glory?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For, if there was a glory in the religion that involved condemnation, far greater is the glory of the religion that confers righteousness!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Indeed, that which then had glory has lost its glory, because of the glory which surpasses it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And, if that which was to pass away was attended with glory, far more will that which is to endure be surrounded with glory!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}With such a hope as this, we speak with all plainness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}unlike Moses, who covered his face with a veil, to prevent the Israelites from gazing at the disappearance of what was passing away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But their minds were slow to learn. Indeed, to this very day, at the public reading of the old covenant, the same veil remains; only for those who are in union with Christ does it pass away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But, even to this day, whenever Moses is read, a veil lies on their hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yet, whenever someone turns to the Lord, the veil is removed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And the Lord is the Spirit, and, where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And all of us, with faces from which the veil is lifted, seeing, as if reflected in a mirror, the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into his likeness, from glory to glory, as it is given by the Lord, the Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Therefore, since it is by God\uc1\u8217*s mercy that we are engaged in this ministry, we do not lose heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}No, we have renounced the secrecy prompted by shame, refusing to adopt crafty ways, or to tamper with God\uc1\u8217*s message, and commending ourselves to everyone\uc1\u8217*s conscience, in the sight of God, by our exhibition of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And, even if the good news that we bring is veiled, it is veiled only in the case of those who are on the path to ruin \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}people whose minds have been blinded by the God of this age, unbelievers as they are, so that the light from the good news of the glory of the Christ, who is the incarnation of God, should not shine for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}(For it is not ourselves that we proclaim, but Christ Jesus, as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus\uc1\u8217* sake.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Indeed, the same God who said \uc1\u8220*Out of darkness light will shine,\uc1\u8221* has shone in on our hearts, so that we should bring out into the light the knowledge of the glory of God, seen in the face of Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}This treasure we have in these earthen vessels, so that its all-prevailing power may be seen to come from God, and not to be our own.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Though hard pressed on every side, we are never hemmed in; though perplexed, never driven to despair;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}though pursued, never abandoned; though struck down, never killed!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}We always bear on our bodies the marks of the death that Jesus died, so that the life also of Jesus may be exhibited in our bodies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Indeed, we who still live are continually being given over to death for Jesus\uc1\u8217* sake, so that the life also of Jesus may be exhibited in our mortal nature.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so, while death is at work within us, life is at work within you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But, in the same spirit of faith as that expressed in the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I believed, and therefore I spoke,\uc1\u8221* we, also believe, and therefore speak.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For we know that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with him, and will bring us, with you, into his presence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For all this is for your sakes, so that the loving kindness of God, spreading from heart to heart, may cause yet more hearts to overflow with thanksgiving, to his glory.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore, as I said, we do not lose heart. No, even though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The light burden of our momentary trouble is preparing for us a weight of imperishable glory, beyond all measure.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}We, all the while, gaze not on what is seen, but on what is unseen. For what is seen is transient, but what is unseen is imperishable.{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}For we know that if our tent \uc1\u8211* that earthly body which is now our home \uc1\u8211* is taken down, we have a house of God\uc1\u8217*s building, a home not made by hands, imperishable, in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Even while in our present body we sigh, longing to put over it our heavenly house,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}sure that, when we have put it on, we will never be found naked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For we who are in this tent sigh under our burden, unwilling to take it off, yet wishing to put our heavenly body over it, so that all that is mortal may be absorbed in life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he who has prepared us for this change is God, who has also given us his Spirit as a pledge.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, while our home is in the body, we are absent from our home with the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For we guide our lives by faith, and not by what we see.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And in this confidence we would gladly leave our home in the body, and make our home with the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Therefore, whether in our home or absent from our home, our one ambition is to please him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For at the court of the Christ we must all appear in our true characters, so that each may reap the results of the life which he has lived in the body, in accordance with his actions \uc1\u8211* whether good or worthless.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore, because we know the fear inspired by the Lord, it is true that we are trying to win people over, but our motives are plain to God; and I hope that in your inmost hearts they are plain to you also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}We are not \uc1\u8216*commending ourselves\uc1\u8217* again to you, but rather are giving you cause for pride in us, so that you may have an answer ready for those who pride themselves on appearances and not on character.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For, if we were \uc1\u8216*beside ourselves,\uc1\u8217* it was in God\uc1\u8217*s service! If we are not in our senses, it is in yours!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It is the love of the Christ which compels us, when we reflect that, as one died for all, therefore all died;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and that he died for all, so that the living should no longer live for themselves, but for him who died and rose for them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For ourselves, then, from this time forward, we refuse to regard anyone from the world\uc1\u8217*s standpoint. Even if we once thought of Christ from the standpoint of the world, yet now we do so no longer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Therefore, if anyone is in union with Christ, he is a new being! His old life has passed away; a new life has begun!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But all this is the work of God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ, and gave us the ministry of reconciliation \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}To proclaim that God, in Christ, was reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning people\uc1\u8217*s offences against them, and that he had entrusted us with the message of this reconciliation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}It is, then, on Christ\uc1\u8217*s behalf that we are acting as ambassadors, God, as it were, appealing to you through us. We implore you on Christ\uc1\u8217*s behalf \uc1\u8211* Be reconciled to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For our sake God made Christ, who was innocent of sin, one with our sinfulness, so that in him we might be made one with the righteousness of God.{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Therefore, as God\uc1\u8217*s fellow workers, we also appeal to you not to receive his loving kindness in vain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For he says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*At the time for acceptance I listened to you,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and on the day of deliverance I helped you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 Now is the time for acceptance! Now is the day of deliverance!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Never do we put an obstacle in anyone\uc1\u8217*s way, so that no fault may be found with our ministry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}No, we are trying to commend ourselves under all circumstances, as God\uc1\u8217*s assistants should \uc1\u8211* in many an hour of endurance, in troubles, in hardships, in difficulties,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}in floggings, in imprisonments, in riots, in toils, in sleepless nights, in hunger;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by kindliness, by holiness of spirit, by unfeigned love;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}by the message of truth, and by the power of God; by the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}amid honour and disrepute, amid slander and praise; regarded as deceivers, yet proved to be true;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}as unknown, yet well-known; as at death\uc1\u8217*s door, yet, see, we are living; as chastised, yet not killed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}as saddened, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet enriching many; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle and his Converts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}We have been speaking freely to you, dear friends in Corinth; we have opened our heart;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}there is room there for you, yet there is not room, in your love, for us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Can you not in return \uc1\u8211* I appeal to you as I should to children \uc1\u8211* open your hearts to us?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Do not enter into inconsistent relations with those who reject the faith. For what partnership can there be between righteousness and lawlessness? Or what has light to do with darkness?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}What harmony can there be between Christ and Belial? Or what can those who accept the faith have in common with those who reject it?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}What agreement can there be between a temple of God and idols? And we are a temple of the living God. That is what God meant when he said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will live among them, and walk among them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Therefore \uc1\u8216*Come out from among the nations, and separate yourselves from them,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*And touch nothing impure;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will welcome you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and I will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters,\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 says the Lord, the Ruler of all.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}With these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that pollutes either body or spirit, and, in deepest respect for God, aim at perfect holiness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Make room for us in your hearts. In no instance have we ever wronged, or harmed, or taken advantage of, anyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I am not saying this to condemn you. Indeed, I have already said that you are in our heart, to live and die together.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I have the utmost confidence in you; I am always boasting about you. I am full of encouragement and, in spite of all our troubles, my heart is overflowing with happiness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Ever since we reached Macedonia, we have had no rest in body or mind; on every side there have been troubles \uc1\u8211* conflicts without, anxieties within.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But God, who encourages the downcast, has encouraged us by the arrival of Titus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And it is not only by his arrival that we are encouraged, but also by the encouragement which he received from you; for he tells us of your strong affection, your penitence, and your zeal on my behalf \uc1\u8211* so that I am happier still.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For, though I caused you sorrow by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I were inclined to regret it \uc1\u8211* for I see that my letter did cause you sorrow though only for a time \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I am glad now; not because of the sorrow it caused you, but because your sorrow brought you to repentance. For it was God\uc1\u8217*s will that you should feel sorrow, in order that you should not suffer loss in any way at our hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For, when sorrow is in accordance with God\uc1\u8217*s will, it results in a repentance leading to salvation, and which will never be regretted. The sure result of the sorrow that the world knows is death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For see what results that other sorrow \uc1\u8211* sorrow in accordance with God\uc1\u8217*s will \uc1\u8211* has had in your case. What earnestness it produced! What explanations! What strong feeling! What alarm! What longing! What eagerness! What readiness to punish! You have proved yourselves altogether free from guilt in that matter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}So, then, even though I did write to you, it was not for the sake of the wrongdoer, or of the man who was wronged, but to make you conscious, in the sight of God, of your own earnest care for us. And it is this that has encouraged us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In addition to the encouragement that this gave us, we were made far happier still by the happiness of Titus for his heart has been cheered by you all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Although I have been boasting a little to him about you, you did not put me to shame; but, just as every thing we had said to you was true, so our boasting to Titus about you has also proved to be the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And his affection for you is all the greater, as he remembers the deference that you all showed him, and recalls how you received him with anxious care.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I am glad that I can feel perfect confidence in you.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Palestine Famine Fund

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}We want to remind you, friends, of the love that God has shown to the churches in Macedonia \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}How, tired though they were by many a trouble, their overflowing happiness, and even their deep poverty, resulted in a flood of generosity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I can bear witness that to the full extent of their power, and even beyond their power, spontaneously,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and with many an appeal to us for permission, they showed their love, and contributed their share towards the fund for their fellow Christians.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And that, not only in the way we had expected; but first they gave themselves to the Lord, and to us also, in accordance with God\uc1\u8217*s will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And this led us to beg Titus, that since he had started the work for you, he should also see to the completion of this expression of your love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And, remembering how you excel in everything \uc1\u8211* in faith, in teaching, in knowledge, in unfailing earnestness, and in the affection that we have awakened in you \uc1\u8211* I ask you to excel also in this expression of your love.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I am not laying a command on you, but I am making use of the earnestness shown by others to test the genuineness of your affection.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For you do not forget the loving kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ \uc1\u8211* how that for your sakes, although he was rich, he became poor, so that you also might become rich through his poverty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I am only making suggestions on this matter; for this is the best course for you, since you were a year before others, not only in taking action, but also in showing your readiness to do so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And now I want you to complete the work, so that its completion may correspond with your willing readiness \uc1\u8211* in proportion, of course, to your means.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For, where there is willingness, a person\uc1\u8217*s gift is valued by its comparison with what they have, and not with what they do not have.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For our object is not to give relief to others and bring distress on you. It is a matter of a fair balance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}On this occasion what you can spare will supply what they need, at another time what they can spare may supply your need, and so things will be equal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}As scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Those who had much had nothing over, and those who had little did not lack!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I thank God for inspiring Titus with the same keen interest in your welfare that I have;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for Titus has responded to my appeals and, in his great earnestness, is starting to go to you of his own accord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}We are sending with him one of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers whose fame in the service of the good news has spread through all the churches;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and not only that, but he has been elected by the churches to accompany us on our journey, in connexion with this expression of your love, which we are personally administering to the honour of the Lord, and to show our deep interest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}What we are specially guarding against is that any fault should be found with us in regard to our administration of this charitable fund;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for we are trying to make arrangements which will be right, not only in the eyes of the Lord, but also in the eyes of people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}We are also sending with them another of our friends, whose earnestness we have many a time proved in many ways, and whom we now find made even more earnest by his great confidence in you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}If I must say anything about Titus, he is my intimate companion, and he shares my work for you; if it is our friends, they are delegates of the churches, an honour to Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Show them, therefore \uc1\u8211* so that the churches may see it \uc1\u8211* the proof of your affection, and the ground for our boasting to them about you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}With reference, indeed, to the fund for your fellow Christians, it is quite superfluous for me to say anything to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I know, of course, your willingness to help, and I am always boasting of it to the Macedonians. I tell them that you in Greece have been ready for a year past; and it was really your zeal that stimulated most of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So my reason for sending our friends is to prevent what we said about you from proving, in this particular matter, an empty boast, and to enable you to be as well prepared as I have been saying that you are.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Otherwise, if any Macedonians were to come with me, and find you unprepared, we \uc1\u8211* to say nothing of you \uc1\u8211* should feel ashamed of our present confidence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore I think it necessary to beg the friends to go to you in advance, and to complete the arrangements for the gift, which you have already promised, so that it may be ready, as a gift, before I come, and not look as if it were being given under pressure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Remember the saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Scanty sowing, scanty harvest; plentiful sowing, plentiful harvest.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Let everyone give as he has determined before hand, not grudgingly or under compulsion; for God loves a cheerful giver.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}God has power to shower all kinds of blessings on you, so that, having, under all circumstances and on all occasions, all that you can need, you may be able to shower all kinds of benefits on others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}(As scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*He shared freely, he gave to the poor; his righteousness continues for ever.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And he who supplies seed to the sower, and bread for eating, will supply you with seed, and cause it to increase, and will multiply the fruits of your righteousness).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Rich in all things yourselves, you will be able to show liberality to all, which, with our help, will cause thanksgiving to be offered to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For the rendering of a public service such as this, not only relieves the needs of your fellow Christians, but also results in the offering to God of many a thanksgiving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Through the evidence afforded by the service rendered, you cause people to praise God for your fidelity to your profession of faith in the good news of the Christ, as well as for the liberality of your contributions for them and for all others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And they also, in their prayers for you, express their longing to see you, because of the surpassing love of God displayed toward you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All thanks to God for his inestimable gift!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle\uc1\u8217*s Claims and Authority

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Now, I, Paul, make a personal appeal to you by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ \uc1\u8211* I who, \uc1\u8216*in your presence, am humble in my bearing towards you, but, when absent, am bold in my language to you\uc1\u8217* \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I implore you not to drive me to \uc1\u8216*show my boldness,\uc1\u8217* when I do come, by the confident tone which I expect to have to adopt towards some of you, who are expecting to find us influenced in our conduct by earthly motives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For, though we live an earthly life, we do not wage an earthly war.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The weapons for our warfare are not earthly, but, under God, are powerful enough to pull down strongholds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}We are engaged in confuting arguments and pulling down every barrier raised against the knowledge of God. We are taking captive every hostile thought, to bring it into submission to the Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and are fully prepared to punish every act of rebellion, when once your submission is complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You look at the outward appearance of things! Let anyone, who is confident that he belongs to Christ, reflect, for himself, again on the fact \uc1\u8211* that we belong to Christ no less than he does.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Even if I boast extravagantly about our authority \uc1\u8211* which the Lord gave us for building up your faith and not for overthrowing it \uc1\u8211* still I have no reason to be ashamed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I say this so that it doesn\uc1\u8217*t seem as if I am trying to overawe you by my letters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For people say \uc1\u8216*His letters are impressive and vigorous, but his personal appearance is insignificant and his speaking contemptible.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let such a person be assured of this \uc1\u8211* that our words in our letters show us to be, when absent, just what our deeds will show us to be, when present.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}We have not indeed the audacity to class or compare ourselves with some of those who indulge in self-commendation! But, when such persons measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves with themselves, they show a want of wisdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}We, however, will not give way to unlimited boasting, but will confine ourselves to the limits of the sphere to which God limited us, when he permitted us to come as far as Corinth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For it is not the case, as it would be if we were not in the habit of coming to you, that we are exceeding our bounds! Why, we were the very first to reach you with the good news of the Christ!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Our boasting, therefore, is not unlimited, nor does it extend to the labours of others; but our hope is that, as your faith grows, our influence among you may be very greatly increased \uc1\u8211* though still confined to our sphere \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So that we will be able to tell the good news in the districts beyond you, without trespassing on the sphere assigned to others, or boasting of what has been already done.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Let anyone who boasts make their boast of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For it is not those who commend themselves that stand the test, but those who are commended by the Lord.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}I could wish that you would tolerate a little folly in me! But indeed you do tolerate me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I am jealous over you with the jealousy of God. For I promised you in marriage as a pure bride, to one husband \uc1\u8211* the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yet I fear that it may turn out that, just as the snake by his craftiness deceived Eve, so your minds may have lost the loyalty and purity due from you to the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For, if some newcomer is proclaiming a Jesus other than him whom we proclaimed, or if you are receiving a Spirit different from the Spirit which you received, or a good news different from that which you welcomed, then you are marvellously tolerant!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I do not regard myself as in any way inferior to the most eminent apostles!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Though I am no trained orator, yet I am not without knowledge; indeed we made this perfectly clear to you in every way.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Perhaps you say that I did wrong in humbling myself that you might be exalted \uc1\u8211* I mean because I told you God\uc1\u8217*s good news without payment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I robbed other churches by taking pay from them, so that I might serve you!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, when I was with you in need, I did not become a burden to any of you; for our friends, on coming from Macedonia, supplied my needs. I kept myself, and will keep myself from being an expense to you in any way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}As surely as I know anything of the truth of Christ, this boast, as far as I am concerned, will not be stopped in any part of Greece.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Why? Because I do not love you? God knows that I do!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}What I am doing now I will continue to do in order to cut away the ground from under those who are wishing for some ground for attacking me, so that as regards the thing of which they boast they may appear in their true characters, just as we do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Such people are false apostles, treacherous workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And no wonder; for even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}It is not surprising, therefore, if his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness. But their end will be in accordance with their actions.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}I say again \uc1\u8211* Let no one think me a fool! Yet, if you do, at least welcome me as you would a fool, so that I, too may indulge in a little boasting.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}When I speak like this, I am not speaking as the Master would, but as a fool might, in boasting so confidently.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As so many are boasting of earthly things, I, too, will boast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For all your cleverness, you tolerate fools willingly enough!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You tolerate a person even when they enslave you, when they plunder you, when they get you into their power, when they put on airs of superiority, when they strike you in the face!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I admit, to my shame, that we have been weak. But whatever the subject on which others are not afraid to boast \uc1\u8211* though it is foolish to say so \uc1\u8211* I am not afraid either!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Are they Hebrews? So am I! Are they Israelites? So am I! Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Are they \uc1\u8220*Servants of Christ\uc1\u8221*? Though it is madness to talk like this, I am more so than they! I have had more of toil, more of imprisonment! I have been flogged times without number. I have been often at death\uc1\u8217*s door.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Five times I received at the hands of my own people forty lashes, all but one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Three times I was shipwrecked. I have spent a whole day and night in the deep.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}My journeys have been many. I have been through dangers from rivers, dangers from robbers, dangers from my own people, dangers from the Gentiles, dangers in towns, dangers in the country, dangers on the sea, dangers among people pretending to be followers of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}I have been through toil and hardship. I have passed many a sleepless night; I have endured hunger and thirst; I have often been without food; I have known cold and nakedness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}And, not to speak of other things, there is my daily burden of anxiety about all the churches.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Who is weak without my being weak? Who is led astray without my burning with indignation?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}If I must boast, I will boast of things which show my weakness!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}The God and Father of the Lord Jesus \uc1\u8211* he who is for ever blessed \uc1\u8211* knows that I am speaking the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}When I was in Damascus, the Governor under King Aretas had the gates of that city guarded, so as to arrest me,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}but I was let down in a basket through a window in the wall, and so escaped his hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}I must boast! It is unprofitable; but I will pass to visions and revelations given by the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I know a man in union with Christ, who, fourteen years ago \uc1\u8211* whether in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows \uc1\u8211* was caught up (this man of whom I am speaking) to the third heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And I know that this man \uc1\u8211* whether in the body or separated from the body I do not know; God knows \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable things of which no human being may tell.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}About such a man I will boast, but about myself I will not boast except as regards my weaknesses.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Yet if I choose to boast, I will not be a fool; for I will be speaking no more than the truth. But I refrain, in case anyone should credit me with more than he can see in me or hear from me, and because of the marvellous character of the revelations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It was for this reason, and to prevent my thinking too highly of myself, that a thorn was sent to pierce my flesh \uc1\u8211* an instrument of Satan to discipline me \uc1\u8211* so that I should not think too highly of myself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}About this I three times entreated the Lord, praying that it might leave me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But his reply has been \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*My help is enough for you; for my strength attains its perfection in the midst of weakness.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Most gladly, then, will I boast all the more of my weaknesses, so that the strength of the Christ may overshadow me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}That is why I delight in weakness, ill treatment, hardship, persecution, and difficulties, when borne for Christ. For, when I am weak, then it is that I am strong!
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I have been \uc1\u8216*playing the fool!\uc1\u8217* It is you who drove me to it. For it is you who ought to have been commending me! Although I am nobody, in no respect did I prove inferior to the most eminent apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The marks of the true apostle were exhibited among you in constant endurance, as well as by signs, by marvels, and by miracles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}In what respect, I ask, were you treated worse than the other churches, unless it was that, for my part, I refused to become a burden to you? Forgive me the wrong I did to you!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Remember, this is the third time that I have made every preparation to come to see you, and I will refuse to be a burden to you; I want, not your money, but you. It is not the duty of children to put by for their parents, but of parents to put by for their children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For my part, I will most gladly spend, and be spent, for your welfare. Can it be that the more intensely I love you the less I am to be loved?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}You will admit that I was not a burden to you but you say that I was \uc1\u8216*crafty\uc1\u8217* and caught you \uc1\u8216*by a trick\uc1\u8217*!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Do you assert that I took advantage of you through any of those whom I have sent to you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I urged Titus to go, and I sent another follower with him. Did Titus take any advantage of you? Didn\uc1\u8217*t we live in the same Spirit, and tread in the same footsteps?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Have you all this time been fancying that it is to you that we are making our defence? No, it is in the sight of God, and in union with Christ, that we are speaking. And all this, dear friends, is to build up your characters;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for I am afraid that perhaps, when I come, I may find that you are not what I want you to be, and, on the other hand, that you may find that I am what you do not want me to be. I am afraid that I may find quarrelling, jealousy, ill feeling, rivalry, slandering, backbiting, self-assertion, and disorder.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I am afraid that, on my next visit, my God may humble me in regard to you, and that I may have to mourn over many who have long been sinning, and have not repented of the impurity, immorality, and sensuality, in which they have indulged.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}For the third time I am coming to see you. By the word of two or three witnesses each statement will be established.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I have said it, and I say it again before I come, just as if I were with you on my second visit, though for the moment absent, I say to those who have been long sinning, as well as to all others \uc1\u8211* that if I come again, I will spare no one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And that will be the proof, which you are looking for, that the Christ speaks through me. There is no weakness in his dealings with you. No, he shows his power among you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For though his crucifixion was due to weakness, his life is due to the power of God. And we, also, are weak in his weakness, but with him we will live for you through the power of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Put yourselves to the test, to see whether you are holding to the faith. Examine yourselves. Surely you recognise this fact about yourselves \uc1\u8211* that Jesus Christ is in you! Unless indeed you cannot stand the test!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But I hope that you will recognise that we can stand the test.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}We pray to God that you may do nothing wrong, not that we may be seen to stand the test, but that you may do what is right, even though we may seem not to stand the test.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}We have no power at all against the truth, but we have power in the service of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We are glad when we are weak, if you are strong. And what we pray for is that you may become perfect.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This is my reason for writing as I am now doing, while I am away from you, so that, when I am with you, I may not act harshly in the exercise of the authority which the Lord gave me \uc1\u8211* and gave me for building up and not for pulling down.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And now, friends, goodbye. Aim at perfection; take courage; agree together; live in peace. And then God, the source of all love and peace, will be with you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Greet one another with a sacred kiss.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}All Christ\uc1\u8217*s people here send you their greetings.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion with the Holy Spirit, be with you all.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Galatians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Galatians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To the churches in Galatia, from Paul, an apostle whose commission is not from any human authority and is given, not by human beings, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and from all the followers of the Lord here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, bless you and give you peace. For Christ, to rescue us from this present wicked age,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}gave himself for our sins, in accordance with the will of our God and Father,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}to whom be ascribed all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}I am astonished at your so soon deserting him, who called you through the love of Christ, for a different \uc1\u8220*good news,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}which is really no good news at all. But then, I know that there are people who are harassing you, and who want to pervert the good news of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Yet even if we \uc1\u8211* or if an angel from heaven were to tell you any other \uc1\u8220*good news\uc1\u8221* than that which we told you, may he be accursed!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We have said it before, and I repeat it now \uc1\u8211* If anyone tells you a \uc1\u8220*good news\uc1\u8221* other than that which you received, may he be accursed!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Is this, I ask, trying to conciliate people, or God? Am I seeking to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I should not be a servant of Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Independence of the Apostle\uc1\u8217*s Gospel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I remind you, friends, that the good news which I told is no mere human invention.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I, at least, did not receive it from any human being, nor was I taught it, but it came to me through a revelation made by Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You heard, no doubt, of my conduct when I was devoted to Judaism \uc1\u8211* how I persecuted the church of God to an extent beyond belief, and tried to destroy it,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and how, in my devotion to Judaism, I surpassed many of my contemporaries among my own people in my intense earnestness in upholding the traditions of my ancestors.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But when God, who had set me apart even before my birth, and who called me by his love,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}saw fit to reveal his Son in me, so that I might tell the good news of him among the Gentiles, then at once, instead of consulting any human being,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}or even going up to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before me, I went to Arabia, and came back again to Damascus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Three years afterwards I went up to Jerusalem to make the acquaintance of Peter, and I stayed a fortnight with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I did not, however, see any other apostle, except James, the Master\uc1\u8217*s brother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}(As to what I am now writing to you, I call God to witness that I am speaking the truth).{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Afterwards I went to the districts of Syria and Cilicia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But I was still unknown even by sight to the Christian churches in Judea;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}all that they had heard was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The man who once persecuted us is now telling the good news of the faith of which he once tried to destroy.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And they praised God for my sake.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Fourteen years afterwards I went up to Jerusalem again with Barnabas, and I took Titus also with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}It was in obedience to a revelation that I went; and I laid before the apostles the good news that I am proclaiming among the Gentiles. I did this privately before those who are thought highly of because I was afraid that I might possibly be taking, or might have already taken, a course which would prove useless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yet even my companion, Titus, though a Greek, was not compelled to be circumcised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But, because of those who pretended to be followers who had stolen in, the intruders who had crept in to spy on the liberty which we have through union with Christ Jesus, in order to bring us back to slavery \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Why, we did not for a moment yield submission to them, so that the truth of the good news might be yours always!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Of those who are thought somewhat highly of \uc1\u8211* what they once were makes no difference to me; God does not recognise human distinctions \uc1\u8211* those, I say, who are thought highly of added nothing to my message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}On the contrary, they saw that I had been entrusted with the good news for the Gentiles, just as Peter had been for the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For he who gave Peter power for his mission to the Jews gave me, also, power to go to the Gentiles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Recognising the charge entrusted to me, James, Peter, and John, who were regarded as pillars of the church, openly acknowledged Barnabas and me as fellow workers, agreeing that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the Jews.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Only we were to remember the poor \uc1\u8211* the thing I was myself anxious to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But, when Peter came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face; for he stood self-condemned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Before certain persons came from James, he had been in the habit of eating with the Gentile converts; but, when they came, he began to withdraw and hold aloof, because he was afraid of offending those who still held to circumcision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The rest of the Jewish converts were guilty of the same hypocrisy, so that even Barnabas was led away by it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, when I saw that they were not dealing straightforwardly with the truth of the good news, I said to Peter, before them all, \uc1\u8216*If you, who were born a Jew, adopt Gentile customs, instead of Jewish, why are you trying to compel the Gentile converts to adopt Jewish customs?\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Law and the Gospel

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}We, though we are Jews by birth and not sinners of Gentile origin, know that no one is pronounced righteous as the result of obedience to Law, but only through faith in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}So we placed our faith in Christ Jesus, in order that we might be pronounced righteous, as the result of faith in Christ, and not of obedience to Law; for such obedience will not result in even one soul\uc1\u8217*s being pronounced righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If, while seeking to be pronounced righteous through union with Christ, we were ourselves seen to be sinners, would that make Christ an agent of sin? Heaven forbid!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For, if I rebuild the things that I pulled down, I prove myself to have done wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I, indeed, through Law became dead to Law, in order to live for God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I have been crucified with Christ. So it is no longer I that live, but it is Christ who lives in me; and, as for my present earthly life, I am living it by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I do not reject the love of God. If righteousness comes through Law, then there was no need for Christ to die!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Foolish Galatians! Who has been enchanting you \uc1\u8211* you before whose eyes Jesus Christ was depicted on the cross?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Here is the one thing that I want to find out from you \uc1\u8211* Did you receive the Spirit as the result of obedience to Law, or of your having listened with faith?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Can you be so foolish? After beginning with what is spiritual, do you now end with what is external?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Did you go through so much to no purpose? \uc1\u8211* if indeed it really was to no purpose!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}He who supplies you abundantly with his Spirit and endows you with such powers \uc1\u8211* does he do this as the result of obedience to Law? Or as the result of your having listened with faith?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It is just as it was with Abraham \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 he had faith in God, and his faith was regarded by God as righteousness.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You see, then, that those whose lives are based on faith are the sons of Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And scripture, foreseeing that God would pronounce the Gentiles righteous as the result of faith, foretold the good news to Abraham in the words \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Through you all the Gentiles will be blessed.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, therefore, those whose lives are based on faith share the blessings bestowed on the faith of Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}All who rely on obedience to Law are under a curse, for scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Cursed is everyone who does not abide by all that is written in the book of the Law, and do it.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Again, it is evident that no one is pronounced righteous before God through Law, for we read \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Through faith the righteous will find life.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But the Law is not based on faith; no, its words are \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Those who practice these precepts will find life through them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Christ ransomed us from the curse pronounced in the Law, by taking the curse on himself for us, for scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Cursed is anyone who is hanged on a tree.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And this he did that the blessing given to Abraham might be extended to the Gentiles through their union with Jesus Christ; that so, through our faith, we also might receive the promised gift of the Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}To take an illustration, friends, from daily life \uc1\u8211* No one sets aside even an agreement between two people, when once it has been confirmed, nor do they add conditions to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Now it was to Abraham that the promises were made, \uc1\u8220*and to his offspring.\uc1\u8221* It was not said \uc1\u8220*to his offsprings,\uc1\u8221* as if many persons were meant, but the words were \uc1\u8220*to your offspring,\uc1\u8221* showing that one person was meant \uc1\u8211* and that was Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My point is this \uc1\u8211* An agreement already confirmed by God cannot be canceled by the Law, which came four hundred and thirty years later, so as to cause the promise to be set aside.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If our heritage is the result of Law, then it has ceased to be the result of a promise. Yet God conferred it on Abraham by a promise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}What, then, you ask, was the use of the Law? It was a later addition, to make people conscious of their wrongdoings, and intended to last only until the coming of that offspring to whom the promise had been made; and it was delivered through angels by a mediator.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Now mediation implies more than one person, but God is one only.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Does that set the Law in opposition to God\uc1\u8217*s promises? Heaven forbid! For, if a Law had been given capable of bestowing life, then righteousness would have actually owed its existence to Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the words of scripture represent the whole world as being in bondage to sin, so that the promised blessing, dependent, as it is, on faith in Jesus Christ, may be given to those who have faith in him.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Before the coming of faith, we were kept under the guard of the Law, in bondage, awaiting the faith that was destined to be revealed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Thus the Law has proved a guide to lead us to Christ, in order that we may be pronounced righteous as the result of faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}But now that faith has come we no longer need a guide.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For you are all sons of God, through your faith in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For all of you who were baptized into union with Christ clothed yourselves with Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}All distinctions between Jew and Greek, slave and free, male and female, have vanished; for in union with Christ Jesus you are all one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}And, since you belong to Christ, it follows that you are Abraham\uc1\u8217*s offspring and, under the promise, sharers in the inheritance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}My point is this \uc1\u8211* as long as the heir is under age, there is no difference between him and a slave, though he is master of the whole estate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He is subject to the control of guardians and stewards, during the period for which his father has power to appoint them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And so is it with us; when we were under age, as it were, we were slaves to the puerile teaching of this world;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}but, when the full time came, God sent his Son \uc1\u8211* born a woman\uc1\u8217*s child, born subject to Law \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}to ransom those who were subject to Law, so that we might take our position as sons.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And it is because you are sons that God sent into our hearts the Spirit of his Son, with the cry \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Abba, our Father.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You, therefore, are no longer a slave, but a son; and, if a son, then an heir also, by God\uc1\u8217*s appointment.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Yet formerly, in your ignorance of God, you became slaves to \uc1\u8220*gods\uc1\u8221* which were no gods.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But now that you have found God \uc1\u8211* or, rather, have been found by him \uc1\u8211* how is it that you are turning back to that poor and feeble puerile teaching, to which yet once again you are wanting to become slaves?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You are scrupulous in keeping days and months and seasons and years!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You make me fear that the labour which I have spent on you may have been wasted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I entreat you, friends, to become like me, as I became like you. You have never done me any wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You remember that it was owing to bodily infirmity that on the first occasion I told you the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And as for what must have tried you in my condition, it did not inspire you with scorn or disgust, but you welcomed me as if I had been an angel of God \uc1\u8211* or Christ Jesus himself!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}What has become then, of your blessings? For I can bear witness that, had it been possible, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Am I to think, then, that I have become your enemy by telling you the truth?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Certain people are seeking your favour, but with no honourable object. No, indeed, they want to isolate you, so that you will have to seek their favour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}It is always honourable to have your favour sought in an honourable cause, and not only when I am with you, my dear children \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}you for whom I am again enduring a mother\uc1\u8217*s pains, until a likeness to Christ will have been formed in you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But I could wish to be with you now and speak in a different tone, for I am perplexed about you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Tell me, you who want to be still subject to Law \uc1\u8211* Why don\uc1\u8217*t you listen to the Law?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Scripture says that Abraham had two sons, one the child of the slave-woman and the other the child of the free woman.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}But the child of the slave-woman was born in the course of nature, while the child of the free woman was born in fulfilment of a promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}This story may be taken as an allegory. The women stand for two covenants. One covenant, given from Mount Sinai, produces a race of slaves and is represented by Hagar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia, and represents the Jerusalem of today, for she and her children are in slavery.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}But the Jerusalem above is free, and she it is who is our mother.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}For scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Rejoice, you barren one, who have never given birth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 break into shouts, you who are never in labour,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 for many are the children of her who is desolate \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 yes, more than of her who has a husband.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}As for ourselves, friends, we, like Isaac, are children born in fulfilment of a promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Yet at that time the child born in the course of nature persecuted the child born by the power of the Spirit; and it is the same now.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}But what does the passage of scripture say?
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Send away the slave-woman and her son; for the slave\uc1\u8217*s son will not be coheir with the son of the free woman.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}And so, friends, we are not children of a slave, but of her who is free.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Gospel in the Daily Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}It is for freedom that Christ set us free; stand firm therefore, and do not again be held under the yoke of slavery.
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Understand that I, Paul, myself tell you that if you allow yourselves to be circumcised, Christ will avail you nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I again declare to everyone who receives circumcision, that he binds himself to obey the whole Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You have severed yourselves from Christ \uc1\u8211* you who are seeking to be pronounced righteous through Law; you have fallen away from love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For we, by the help of the Spirit, are eagerly waiting for the fulfilment of our hope \uc1\u8211* that we may be pronounced righteous as the result of faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}If we are in union with Christ Jesus, neither is circumcision nor the omission of it anything, but faith, working through love, is everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You were once making good progress! Who has hindered you from obeying the truth?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The persuasion brought to bear on you does not come from him who calls you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}A little yeast leavens all the dough.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I, through my union with the Lord, am persuaded that you will learn to think with me. But the man who is disturbing your minds will have to bear his punishment, whoever he may be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If I, friends, am still proclaiming circumcision, why am I still persecuted? It seems that the cross has ceased to be an obstacle!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I could even wish that the people who are unsettling you would go further still and mutilate themselves.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Remember, friends, to you the call came to give you freedom. Only, do not make your freedom an opportunity for self-indulgence but serve one another in a loving spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Indeed, the whole Law has been summed up in this one precept \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But, if you are continually wounding and preying on one another, take care that you are not destroyed by one another.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This is what I have to say \uc1\u8211* Let your steps be guided by the Spirit, and then you will never gratify the cravings of your earthly nature.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For these cravings of our earthly nature conflict with the Spirit, and the Spirit with our earthly nature \uc1\u8211* they are two contrary principles \uc1\u8211* so that you cannot do what you wish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But, if you follow the guidance of the Spirit, you are not subject to Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The sins of our earthly nature are unmistakable. They are sins like these \uc1\u8211* sexual immorality, impurity, indecency,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}idolatry, sorcery, quarrels, strife, jealousy, outbursts of passion, rivalries, dissensions, divisions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}feelings of envy, drunkenness, revelry, and the like. And I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who indulge in such things will have no place in the kingdom of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But the fruit produced by the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, kindliness, generosity, trustfulness, gentleness, self-control.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Against such things there is no law!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And those who belong to Jesus, the Christ, have already crucified their earthly nature, with its passions and its cravings.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Since our life is due to the Spirit, let us rule our conduct also by the Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Do not let us grow vain, and provoke or envy one another.{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}My friends, even if someone should be caught committing a sin, you who are spiritually minded should, in a gentle spirit, help them to recover themselves, taking care that you yourselves are not tempted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Bear one another\uc1\u8217*s burdens, and so carry out the Law of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}If a person imagines themselves to be somebody, when they are really nobody, they deceive themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let everyone test their own work, and then their cause for satisfaction will be in themselves and not in a comparison with their neighbour;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for everyone must bear their own load.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The person, however, who is being instructed in the message ought always to share their blessings with their teacher.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Do not be deceived. God cannot be mocked. What a person sows that they will reap.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For the person who sows the field of their earthly nature will from that earthly nature reap corruption; while the one who sows the field of the spirit will from that spirit reap eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let us never tire of doing right, for at the proper season we will reap our harvest, if we do not grow weary.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Therefore, I say, as the opportunity occurs, let us treat everyone with kindness, and especially members of the household of the faith.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion in the Apostle\uc1\u8217*s own handwriting

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}See in what large letters I am writing with my own hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The people who are trying to compel you to be circumcised are the people who wish to appear to advantage in regard to outward observances. They do it only to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Jesus, the Christ{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Even these men who are circumcised do not themselves keep the Law; yet they want you to be circumcised, so that they may boast of your observance of the rite.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But, for my part, may I never boast of anything except the cross of Jesus Christ, our Master, through whom the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For neither is circumcision nor the omission of it anything; but a new nature is everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}May all who rule their conduct by this principle find peace and mercy \uc1\u8211* they who are the Israel of God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For the future let no one trouble me; for I bear the marks of Jesus branded on my body.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}May the blessing of Jesus Christ, our Lord, rest on your souls, friends. Amen.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Ephesians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Ephesians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To Christ\uc1\u8217*s people at Ephesus who are faithful to him, from Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, by the will of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Blessed is the God and Father of Jesus Christ, our Lord, who has blessed us on high with every spiritual blessing, in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For he chose us in our union with Christ before the creation of the universe, so that we might be holy and blameless in his sight, living in the spirit of love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}From the first he destined us, in his goodwill towards us, to be adopted as sons through Jesus Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and so to enhance that glorious manifestation of his loving kindness which he gave us in the one he loves;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for in him, and through the shedding of his blood, we have found redemption in the pardon of our offences.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All this accords with the loving kindness which God lavished on us, accompanied by countless gifts of wisdom and discernment,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}when he made known to us his hidden purpose. And it also accords with the goodwill which God purposed to exhibit in Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}in view of that divine order which was to mark the completion of the ages, when he should make everything, both in heaven and on earth, centre in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In him, I say, for by our union with him we became God\uc1\u8217*s heritage, having from the first been destined for this in the intention of him who, in all that happens, is carrying out his own fixed purpose;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}that we should enhance his glory \uc1\u8211* we who have been the first to rest our hopes on the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And you, too, by your union with him, after you had heard the message of the truth, the good news of your salvation \uc1\u8211* you believed in him and were sealed as his by receiving the holy Spirit, which he had promised.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the Spirit is a pledge of our future heritage, foreshadowing the full redemption of God\uc1\u8217*s own people \uc1\u8211* to enhance his glory.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The power of God displayed in Christ, the Head of the Church

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And therefore I, ever since I heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which prevails among you, and of your confidence in all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}have never omitted to thank God on your behalf, whenever I make mention of you in my prayers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My prayer is that the God of Jesus Christ our Lord, the all-glorious Father, may inspire you with wisdom and true insight through a fuller knowledge of himself;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}that your minds may be so enlightened that you may realise the hope given by God\uc1\u8217*s call, the wealth of the glory of his heritage among Christ\uc1\u8217*s people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and the transcendent greatness of the power which he is able to exercise in dealing with us who believe in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The same mighty power was exerted on the Christ, when he raised the Christ from the dead and \uc1\u8220*caused him to sit at his right hand\uc1\u8221* on high, exalting him above all angels and archangels of every rank,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and above every name that can be named, whether in the present age, or in the age to come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And God placed all things under Christ\uc1\u8217*s feet, and gave him to the church as its supreme head;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}for the church is Christ\uc1\u8217*s body, and is filled by him who fills all things everywhere with his presence.{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}You yourselves were once dead because of your offences and sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For at one time you lived in sin, following the ways of the world, in subjection to the Ruler of the powers of the air \uc1\u8211* the Spirit who is still at work among the disobedient.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And it was among them that we all once lived our lives, indulging the cravings of our earthly nature, and carrying out the desires prompted by that earthly nature and by our own thoughts. Our nature exposed us to the divine wrath, like the rest of humanity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet God, in his abundant compassion, and because of the great love with which he loved us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}even though we were dead because of our offences, gave life to us in giving life to the Christ. (By God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness you have been saved.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And, through our union with Christ Jesus, God raised us with him, and caused us to sit with him on high,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}in order that, by his goodness to us in Christ Jesus, he might display in the ages to come the boundless wealth of his loving kindness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For it is by God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness that you have been saved, through your faith. It is not due to yourselves; the gift is God\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It is not due to obedience to Law, so that no one can boast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For we are God\uc1\u8217*s handiwork, created, by our union with Christ Jesus, for the good actions in doing which God had pre-arranged that we should spend our lives.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Remember, therefore, that you were once Gentiles yourselves, as your bodies showed; you were called \uc1\u8220*the Uncircumcised\uc1\u8221* by those who were called \uc1\u8220*the Circumcised\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* circumcised only by human hands!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Remember that you were at that time far from Christ; you were shut out from the citizenship of Israel; you were strangers to the covenants founded on God\uc1\u8217*s promise; you were in the world without hope and without God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But now, through your union with Christ Jesus, you who once were far off have, by the shedding of the blood of the Christ, been brought near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He it is who is our peace. He made the two divisions of humanity one, broke down the barrier that separated them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and in his human nature put an end to the cause of enmity between them \uc1\u8211* the Law with its injunctions and ordinances \uc1\u8211* in order to create, through union with himself, from Jew and Gentile, one new humanity and so make peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And when, on the cross, he had destroyed their mutual enmity, he sought by means of his cross to reconcile them both to God, united in one body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}He came with the good news of peace for you who were far off, and of peace for those who were near;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}for it is through him that we, the Jews and the Gentiles, united in the one Spirit, are now able to approach the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}It follows, then, that you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but are fellow citizens with Christ\uc1\u8217*s people and members of God\uc1\u8217*s household.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You have been built up on the foundation laid by the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}United in him, every part of the building, closely joined together, will grow into a temple, consecrated by its union with the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And, through union in him, you also are being built up together, to be a place where God lives through the Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle\uc1\u8217*s Divine Commission to the Gentiles

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Jesus, the Christ, for the sake of you Gentiles \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For you have heard, I suppose, of the responsible charge with which God entrusted me for your benefit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and also that it was by direct revelation that the hidden purpose of God was made known to me, as I have already briefly told you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And, by reading what I have written, you will be able to judge how far I understand this hidden purpose of God in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In former generations it was not made known to humanity, as fully as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to the apostles and prophets among Christ\uc1\u8217*s people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}That, by union with Christ Jesus and through the good news, the Gentiles are coheirs with us and members of one body, and that they share with us in God\uc1\u8217*s Promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Of this good news I become an assistant, in virtue of the charge with which God entrusted me in the exercise of his power \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Yes, to me, who am less than the least of all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, was this charge entrusted! \uc1\u8211* to tell the Gentiles the good news of the boundless wealth to be found in the Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and to make clear what is God\uc1\u8217*s way of working out that hidden purpose which from the first has been concealed in the mind of the Creator of all things;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}so that now to the archangels and to all the powers on high should be made known, through the church, the all-embracing wisdom of God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}in accordance with that purpose which runs through all the ages and which he has now accomplished in Jesus, the Christ, our Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And in union with him, and through our trust in him, we find courage to approach God with confidence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore I beg you not to be disheartened at the sufferings that I am undergoing for your sakes; for they redound to your honour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For this reason, then, I kneel before the Father \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}from whom all \uc1\u8220*fatherhood\uc1\u8221* in heaven and on earth derives its name \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and pray that, in proportion to the wealth of his glory, he will strengthen you with his power by breathing his Spirit into your inmost soul,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}so that the Christ, through your faith, may make his home within your hearts in love; and I pray that you, now firmly rooted and established, may, with all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}have the power to comprehend in all its width and length and height and depth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and to understand \uc1\u8211* though it surpasses all understanding \uc1\u8211* the love of the Christ; and so be filled with all the fullness of God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}To him who, through his power which is at work within us, is able to do far more than anything that we can ask or conceive \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}to him be all glory through the church and through Christ Jesus, for all generations, age after age. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Gospel and Daily Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}I beg you, then \uc1\u8211* I who am a prisoner in the Master\uc1\u8217*s cause \uc1\u8211* to live lives worthy of the call that you have received;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}always humble and gentle, patient, bearing lovingly with one another,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and striving to maintain in the bond of peace the unity given by the Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}There is but one body and one Spirit, just as there was but one hope set before you when you received your call.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}There is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}There is but one God and Father of all \uc1\u8211* the God who is over all, pervades all, and is in all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Everyone of us, however, has been entrusted with some charge, each in accordance with the extent of the gift of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}That is why it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*When he went up on high, he led his captives into captivity. And gave gifts to humanity.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Now surely this \uc1\u8220*going up\uc1\u8221* must imply that he had already gone down into the world beneath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He who went down is the same as he who went up \uc1\u8211* up beyond the highest heaven, so that he might fill all things with his presence.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And he it is who gave to the church apostles, prophets, missionaries, pastors, and teachers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}to fit his people for the work of the ministry, for the building up of the body of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And this will continue, until we all attain to that unity which is given by faith and by a fuller knowledge of the Son of God; until we reach maturity \uc1\u8211* the full standard of the perfection of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then we will no longer be like infants, tossed backward and forward, blown about by every breath of human teaching and by people\uc1\u8217*s trickery and craftiness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but holding the truth in a spirit of love, we will grow into complete union with him who is our head \uc1\u8211* Christ himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For from him the whole body, closely joined and knit together by the contact of every part with the source of its life, derives its power to grow, in proportion to the vigour of each individual part; and so is being built up in a spirit of love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This, then, as one in union with the Lord, I implore: Do not continue to live such purposeless lives as the Gentiles live,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}with their powers of discernment darkened, cut off from the life of God, owing to the ignorance that prevails among them and to the hardness of their hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Lost to all sense of shame, they have abandoned themselves to licentiousness, in order to practice every kind of impurity without restraint.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But far different is the lesson you learned from the Christ \uc1\u8211* if, that is, you really listened to him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and through union with him were taught the truth, as it is to be found in Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For you learned with regard to your former way of living that you must cast off your old nature, which, yielding to deluding passions, grows corrupt;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}that the spirit of your minds must be constantly renewed;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and that you must clothe yourselves in that new nature which was created to resemble God, with the righteousness and holiness springing from the truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Since, therefore, you have cast off what is false, you must every one of you speak the truth to your neighbours. For we are united to one another like the parts of a body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Be angry, yet do not sin. Do not let the sun go down on your anger;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and give no opportunity to the devil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Let the person who steals steal no longer, but rather they should toil with their hands at honest work, so that they may have something to share with anyone in need.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Never let any foul word pass your lips, but only such good words as the occasion demands, so that they may be a help to those who hear them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}And do not grieve God\uc1\u8217*s Holy Spirit; for it was through that Spirit that God sealed you as his, against the day of redemption.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Let all bitterness, passion, anger, brawling, and abusive language be banished from among you, as well as all malice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Be kind to one another, tenderhearted, ready to forgive one another, just as God, in Christ, forgave you.{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Therefore imitate God, as his dear children,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and live a life of love, following the example of the Christ, who loved you and gave himself for you as an offering and a sacrifice to God, that should be fragrant and acceptable.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}As for sexual immorality and every kind of impurity, or greed, do not let them even be mentioned among you, as befits Christ\uc1\u8217*s people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}nor shameful conduct, nor foolish talk or jesting, for they are wholly out of place among you; but rather thanksgiving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For of this you may be sure \uc1\u8211* that no one who is unchaste or impure or greedy of gain (for to be greedy of gain is idolatry) has any place awaiting him in the kingdom of the Christ and God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Do not let anyone deceive you with specious arguments. Those are the sins that bring down the wrath of God on the disobedient.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore have nothing to do with such people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For, although you were once in darkness, now, by your union with the Lord, you are in the light. Live as children of light \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}for the outcome of life in the light may be seen in every form of goodness, righteousness, and sincerity \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}always trying to find out what is pleasing to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Take no part in deeds of darkness, from which no good can come; on the contrary, expose them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}It is degrading even to speak of the things continually done by them in secret.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}All such actions, when exposed, have their true character made manifest by the light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For everything that has its true character made manifest is clear as light. And that is why it is said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Sleeper, awake!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Arise from the dead,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the Christ will give you light!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Take great care, then, how you live \uc1\u8211* not unwisely but wisely,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}making the most of every opportunity; for these are evil days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Therefore do not grow thoughtless, but try to understand what the Lord\uc1\u8217*s will is.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Do not drink wine to excess, for that leads to profligacy; but seek to be filled with the Spirit of God, and speak to one another in psalms and hymns and sacred songs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Sing and make music in your hearts to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Always give thanks for everything to our God and Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Submit to one another because you honour and respect Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Wives should submit to their husbands as submitting to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For a man is the head of his wife, as the Christ is the head of the church \uc1\u8211* being indeed himself the Saviour of his body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But as the church submits to the Christ, so also should wives submit to their husbands in everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Husbands, love your wives, just as the Christ loved the church, and gave himself for her,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}to make her holy, after purifying her by the washing with the water, according to his promise;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}so that he might himself bring the church, in all her beauty, into his own presence, with no spot or wrinkle or blemish of any kind, but that she might be holy and faultless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}That is how husbands ought to love their wives \uc1\u8211* as if they were their own bodies. A man who loves his wife is really loving himself;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}for no one ever yet hated his own body. But everyone feeds his body and cares for it, just as the Christ for the church;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}for we are members of his body.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and be united to his wife; and the man and his wife will become one.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}In this there is a profound truth \uc1\u8211* I am speaking of Christ and his church.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}However, for you individually, let each love his wife as if she were himself; and the wife be careful to respect her husband.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Children, obey your parents, as children of the Lord; for that is but right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8220*Honour your father and mother\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* this is the first Commandment with a promise \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*so that you may prosper and have a long life on earth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And fathers, do not irritate your children, but bring them up with Christian discipline and instruction.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Slaves, obey your earthly masters, with anxious care, giving them ungrudging service, as if obeying the Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}not only when their eyes are on you, as if you had merely to please people, but as slaves of Christ, who are trying to carry out the will of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Give your service heartily and cheerfully, as working for the Master and not for people;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for you know that everyone will be rewarded by the Master for any honest work that he has done, whether he is a slave or free.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And masters, treat your slaves in the same spirit. Give up threatening them; for you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and that before him there is no distinction of rank.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the future, find strength in your union with the Lord, and in the power which comes from his might.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Put on the full armour of God, so that you may be able to stand your ground against the stratagems of the devil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For ours is no struggle against enemies of flesh and blood, but against all the various powers of evil that hold sway in the darkness around us, against the spirits of wickedness on high.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore take up the full armour of God, so that when the evil day comes, you may be able to withstand the attack, and, having fought to the end, still to stand your ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Stand your ground, then, with truth for your belt, and with righteousness for your breastplate,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and with the readiness to serve the good news of peace as shoes for your feet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At every onslaught take up faith for your shield; for with it you will be able to extinguish all the flaming darts of the evil one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit \uc1\u8211* which is the message of God \uc1\u8211* always with prayer and supplication.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Pray in spirit at all times. Be intent on this, with unwearying perseverance and supplication for all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and on my behalf also, so that when I begin to speak, words may be given me, so that I may fearlessly make known the inmost truth of the good news,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}on behalf of which I am an ambassador \uc1\u8211* in chains! Pray that, in telling it, I may speak fearlessly as I ought.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}To enable you, as well as others, to know all that concerns me and what I am doing, Tychicus, our dear friend and faithful helper in the Master\uc1\u8217*s cause, will tell you everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I am sending him to you on purpose that you may learn all about us, and that he may cheer your hearts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}May God, the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ give every follower peace, and love linked with faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}May God\uc1\u8217*s blessing be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Philippians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Philippians
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people at Philippi, with the supervisors and assistants, from Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you, and give you peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Every recollection that I have of you is a cause of thanksgiving to God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}always, in every prayer that I offer for you all \uc1\u8211* my prayers are full of joy \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}because of the share that you have had in spreading the good news, from the first day that you received it until now.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For of this I am confident, that he who began a good work in you will complete it in readiness for the day of Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And, indeed, I am justified in feeling like this about you all; because you have a warm place in my heart \uc1\u8211* you who all, both in my imprisonment and in the work of defending and establishing the good news, shared my privilege with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}God will bear me witness how I yearn for you all with the tenderness of Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And what I pray for is this \uc1\u8211* that your love may grow yet stronger and stronger, with increasing knowledge and all discernment,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}until you are able to appreciate all moral distinctions. And I pray, too, that you may be kept pure and blameless against the day of Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}bearing a rich harvest of that righteousness which comes through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Friends, I want you to realise that what has happened to me has actually served to forward the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It has even become evident, not only to all the imperial guard, but to everyone else, that it is for Christ\uc1\u8217*s sake that I am in chains.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And besides this, most of our fellow followers have gained confidence in the Lord through my chains, and now venture with far greater freedom to speak of God\uc1\u8217*s message fearlessly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}It is true that some do proclaim the Christ out of jealousy and opposition, but there are others who proclaim him from goodwill.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The latter do it from love for me, knowing that I have been appointed to plead the cause of the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The former spread the news of the Christ in a factious spirit, and not sincerely, thinking to add to the pain of my chains.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}But what of that? Only that in some way or other, either with assumed or with real earnestness, Christ is being made known; and at that I rejoice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Yes, and I will rejoice, for I know that, through your prayers and through a rich supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, all this will make for my salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}And this will fulfil my earnest expectation and hope that I will have no cause for shame, but that, with unfailing courage, now as before, Christ will be honoured in my body, whether by my life or by my death,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for to me life is Christ, and death is gain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But what if the life here in the body \uc1\u8211* if this brings me fruit from my labours? Then which to choose I cannot tell! I am sorely perplexed either way!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}My own desire is to depart and be with Christ, for this would be far better.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But, for your sakes, it may be more needful that I should still remain here in the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Yes, I am confident that this is so, and therefore I am sure that I will stay, and stay near you all, to promote your progress and joy in the faith;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}so that, when you once more have me among you, you, in your union with Christ Jesus, may find in me fresh cause for exultation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Under all circumstances let your lives be worthy of the good news of the Christ: so that, whether I come and see you, or whether I hear of your affairs at a distance, I may know that you are standing firm, animated by one spirit, and joining with one heart in a common struggle for the faith taught by the good news,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}without ever shrinking from your opponents. To them this will be a sign of their destruction and of your salvation \uc1\u8211* a sign from God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For, on behalf of Christ, you have had the privilege granted you, not only of trusting in him, but also of suffering on his behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}You will be engaged in the same hard struggle as that which you once saw me waging, and which you hear that I am waging still.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}If, then, any encouragement comes through union with Christ, if there is any persuasive power in love, if there is any communion with the Spirit, if there is any tenderness or pity,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I entreat you to make my happiness complete \uc1\u8211* live together animated by the same spirit and in mutual love, one in heart, animated by one Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Nothing should be done out of selfish ambition or vain conceit. Rather, in humility lift others up above yourselves,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}considering not only your own interests but also the interests of others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let the spirit of Christ Jesus be yours also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Though the divine nature was his from the beginning, yet he did not look on equality with God as above all things to be clung to,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but impoverished himself by taking the nature of a servant and becoming like one of us;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}he appeared among us as a man, and still further humbled himself by submitting even to death \uc1\u8211* to death on a cross!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And that is why God raised him to the very highest place, and gave him the name which stands above all other names,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}so that in adoration of the name of Jesus every knee should bend, in heaven, on earth, and under the earth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and that every tongue should acknowledge JESUS CHRIST as LORD \uc1\u8211* to the glory of God the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore, my dear friends, as you have always been obedient in the past, so now work out your own salvation with anxious care, not only when I am with you, but all the more now that I am absent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Remember it is God who, in his kindness, is at work within you, enabling you both to will and to work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}In all that you do, avoid murmuring and dissension,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}so as to prove yourselves blameless and innocent \uc1\u8211* faultless children of God, in the midst of an evil-disposed and perverse generation, in which you are seen shining like stars in a dark world,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}offering to them the message of life; and then I will be able at the day of Christ to boast that I did not run my course for nothing, or toil for nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And yet, even if, when your faith is offered as a sacrifice to God, my lifeblood must be poured out in addition, still I will rejoice and share the joy of you all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and you must also rejoice and share my joy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I hope, however, as one who trusts in the Lord Jesus, to send Timothy to you before long, so that I may myself be cheered by receiving news of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}For I have no one but him to send \uc1\u8211* no one of kindred spirit who would take the same genuine interest in your welfare.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}They are all pursuing their own aims and not those of Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}But you know what Timothy has proved himself to be, and how, like a child working for his father, he worked hard with me in spreading the good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}It is Timothy, then, whom I hope to send, just as soon as I find out what is going to happen to me here.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And I am confident, as one who trusts in the Lord Jesus, that before long I myself will follow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Still I think it necessary to send Epaphroditus to you now, for he is my dear friend, fellow worker, and fellow soldier, and he was also your messenger to help me in my need.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For he has been longing to see you all, and has been distressed because you heard of his illness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And I can assure you that his illness very nearly proved fatal. But God had pity on him, and not on him only but also on me, so that I might not have sorrow on sorrow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}I am all the more ready, therefore, to send him, so that the sight of him may revive your spirits and my own sorrow be lightened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Give him, then, the heartiest of Christian welcomes, and hold such people in great honour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}For it was owing to his devotion to the Master\uc1\u8217*s work that he was at the point of death, having risked his own life in the effort to supply what was wanting in the help that you sent me.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}In conclusion, my friends, may all joy be yours in your union with the Lord. To repeat what I have already written does not weary me, and is the safe course for you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Beware of those dogs! Beware of those mischievous workers! Beware of the men who mutilate themselves!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For it is we who are the circumcised \uc1\u8211* we whose worship is prompted by the Spirit of God, who exult in Christ Jesus, and who do not rely on external privileges;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}though I, if anyone, have cause to rely even on them. If anyone thinks he can rely on external privileges, far more can I!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}I was circumcised when eight days old; I am an Israelite by birth, and of the tribe of Benjamin; I am a Hebrew, and the child of Hebrews. As to the Law, I was a Pharisee;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}as to zeal, I was a persecutor of the church; as to such righteousness as is due to Law, I proved myself blameless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But all the things which I once held to be gains I have now, for the Christ\uc1\u8217*s sake, come to count as loss.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}More than that, I count everything as loss, for the sake of the exceeding value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. And for his sake I have lost everything, and count it as rubbish, if I may but gain Christ and be found in union with him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}any righteousness that I have being, not the righteousness that results from Law, but the righteousness which comes through faith in Christ \uc1\u8211* the righteousness which is derived from God and is founded on faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then indeed I will know Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and all that it means to share his sufferings,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}in the hope that, if I become like him in death, I may possibly attain to the resurrection from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Not that I have already laid hold of it, or that I am already made perfect. But I press on, in the hope of actually laying hold of that for which indeed I was laid hold of by Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For I, friends, do not regard myself as having yet laid hold of it. But this one thing I do \uc1\u8211* forgetting what lies behind, and straining every nerve for that which lies in front,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I press on to the goal, to gain the prize of that heavenward call which God gave me through Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Let all of us, then, whose faith is mature, think this way. Then, if on any matter you think otherwise, God will make that also plain to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Only we are bound to order our lives by what we have already attained.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}My friends, unite in following my example, and fix your eyes on those who are living by the pattern which we have set you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For there are many \uc1\u8211* of whom I have often told you, and now tell you even with tears \uc1\u8211* who are living in enmity to the cross of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The end of such people is ruin; for their appetites are their God, and they glory in their shame; their minds are given up to earthly things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But we are citizens of heaven, and from heaven we expect a saviour to come, the Lord Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}By the exercise of his power to bring everything into subjection to himself, he will make our humble bodies like his glorious body.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}So then, my dear friends, whom I am longing to see \uc1\u8211* you who are my joy and my crown, stand fast in union with the Lord, dear friends.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I entreat Euodia, and I entreat Syntyche, to live in harmony, in union with the Lord;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}yes, and I ask you, my true comrade, to help them, remembering that they toiled by my side in spreading the good news; and so, too, did Clement and my other fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}All joy be yours at all times in your union with the Lord. Again I repeat \uc1\u8211* All joy be yours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Let your forbearing spirit be plain to everyone. The Lord is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Do not be anxious about anything; but under all circumstances, by prayer and entreaty joined with thanksgiving, make your needs known to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then the peace of God, which is beyond all human understanding, will stand guard over your hearts and thoughts, through your union with Christ Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In conclusion, friends, whenever you find things that are true or honourable, righteous or pure, loveable or praiseworthy, or if virtue and honour have any meaning, let them fill your thoughts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}All that you learned and received and heard and saw in me put into practice continually; and then God, the giver of peace, will be with you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It was a matter of great joy to me, as one in union with the Lord, that at length your interest in me had revived. The interest indeed you had, but not the opportunity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Do not think that I am saying this under the pressure of want. For I, however I am placed, have learned to be independent of circumstances.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I know how to face humble circumstances, and I know how to face prosperity. Into all and every human experience I have been initiated \uc1\u8211* into plenty and hunger, into prosperity and want.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I can do everything through the strength of the one who makes me strong!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet you have acted nobly in sharing my troubles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And you at Philippi know, as well as I, that in the early days of the good news \uc1\u8211* at the time when I had just left Macedonia \uc1\u8211* no church, with the one exception of yourselves, had anything to do with me as far as giving and receiving are concerned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Indeed, even while I was still in Thessalonica, you sent more than once to relieve my wants.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It is not that I am anxious for your gifts, but I am anxious to see the abundant return that will be placed to your account. I have enough of everything, and to spare.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}My wants are fully satisfied, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the gifts which you sent me \uc1\u8211* the sweet fragrance of a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And my God, out of the greatness of his wealth, will, in glory, fully satisfy your every need, through your union with Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}To him, our God and Father, be ascribed all glory for every and ever. Amen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Give my greeting to everyone of the people of Christ Jesus. The Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers who are with me send your their greetings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}All Christ\uc1\u8217*s people here, and especially those who belong to the Emperor\uc1\u8217*s household, send theirs.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ rest on your souls.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Colossians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Colossians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, by the will of God, and from Timothy, also a follower of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}To Christ\uc1\u8217*s people at Colossae \uc1\u8211* the followers who are faithful to him: May God, our Father, bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Whenever we pray we never fail to thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}now that we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love that you have for all his people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}because of the hope which is kept safe for you in heaven. Of this hope you heard long ago in the true message of the good news which reached you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}bearing fruit and growing, as it does, through all the world, just as it did among you from the very day that you heard of God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness, and understood what that loving kindness really is.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It is just what you learned from Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who, as a minister of the Christ, faithfully represents us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and who told us of the love with which the Spirit has inspired you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And therefore we, from the very day that we heard this, have never ceased praying for you, or asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of the will of God, which comes through all true spiritual wisdom and insight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then you will live lives worthy of the Master, and so please God in every way. Your lives will be fruitful in every kind of good action, and grow into a fuller knowledge of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}you will be made strong at all points with a strength worthy of the power manifested in his glory \uc1\u8211* strong to endure with patience, and even with gladness, whatever may happen to you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and you will give thanks to the Father who made you fit to share the lot which awaits Christ\uc1\u8217*s people in the realms of light.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Person and Work of the Christ

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For God has rescued us from the tyranny of darkness, and has removed us into the kingdom of his Son, who is the embodiment of his love,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and through whom we have found deliverance in the forgiveness of our sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For Christ is the incarnation of the invisible God \uc1\u8211* firstborn and head of all creation;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}for in him was created all that is in heaven and on earth, the visible and the invisible \uc1\u8211* angels and archangels and all the powers of heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}All has been created through him and for him. He was before all things, and all things unite in him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and he is the head of the church, which is his body. The firstborn from the dead, he is to the church the source of its life, that he, in all things, may stand first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For it pleased the Father that in him the divine nature in all its fulness should live,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and through him to reconcile all things to himself (making peace by the shedding of Christ\uc1\u8217*s blood offered on the cross) \uc1\u8211* whether on earth or in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And it pleased God that you, once estranged from him and hostile towards him in your thoughts, intent only on wickedness \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}but now he has reconciled you to himself by the sacrifice of Christ\uc1\u8217*s earthly body in death \uc1\u8211* it has pleased God that you should stand in his presence holy, pure, and blameless,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}if only you remain true to your faith, firm and immovable, never abandoning the hope held out in the good news to which you listened, which has been proclaimed among all created things under heaven, and of which I, Paul, was made an assistant.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Now at last I can rejoice in my sufferings on your behalf, and in my own person I supplement the afflictions endured by the Christ, for the sake of his body, the church;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}of which I myself became a minister in virtue of the office with which God entrusted me for your benefit, to declare the message of God in all its fulness \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}that truth which has been hidden from former ages and generations. But now it has been revealed to God\uc1\u8217*s people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}to whom it was his pleasure to make known the surpassing glory of that hidden truth when proclaimed among the Gentiles \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Christ among you! Your hope of glory!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}This is the Christ whom we proclaim, warning everyone, and instructing everyone, with all the wisdom that we possess, in the hope of bringing everyone into God\uc1\u8217*s presence perfected by union with Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}It is for that I toil, struggling with all the energy which he inspires and which works powerfully within me.{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}I want you to know in how great a struggle I am engaged for you and for Christ\uc1\u8217*s people at Laodicea, and for all who have not yet seen me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}in the hope that they, being bound to one another by love, and keeping in view the full blessedness of a firm conviction, may be encouraged to strive for a perfect knowledge of God\uc1\u8217*s hidden truth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}even Christ himself, in whom all treasures of wisdom and knowledge lie hidden.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I say this to prevent anyone from deceiving you by plausible arguments.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It is true that I am not with you in person, but I am with you in spirit, and am glad to see the good order and the unbroken front resulting from your faith in Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Since, therefore, you have received Jesus, the Christ, as your Lord, live your lives in union with him \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}rooted in him, building up your characters through union with him, growing stronger through your faith, as you were taught, overflowing with faith and thanksgiving.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Take care that there is not someone who will carry you away by his \uc1\u8220*philosophy\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211* a hollow sham! \uc1\u8211* following, as it does, mere human traditions, and dealing with puerile questions of this world, and not with Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For in Christ the Godhead in all its fulness dwells incarnate;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and, by your union with him, you also are filled with it. He is the head of all archangels and powers of heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}By your union with him you received a circumcision that was not performed by human hands, when you threw off the tyranny of the earthly body, and received the circumcision of the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For in baptism you were buried with Christ; and in baptism you were also raised to life with him, through your faith in the omnipotence of God, who raised him from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And to you, who once were dead, by reason of your sins and your uncircumcised nature \uc1\u8211* to you God gave life in giving life to Christ! He pardoned all our sins!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}He canceled the bond which stood against us \uc1\u8211* the bond that consisted of ordinances \uc1\u8211* and which was directly hostile to us! He has taken it out of our way by nailing it to the cross!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}He rid himself of all the powers of evil, and held them up to open contempt, when he celebrated his triumph over them on the cross!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Do not, then, allow anyone to take you to task on questions of eating or drinking, or in the matter of annual or monthly or weekly festivals.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}These things are only the shadow of what is to come; the substance is in the Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Do not let anyone defraud you of the reality by affecting delight in so-called \uc1\u8220*humility\uc1\u8221* and angel-worship. Such a person busies themselves with their visions, and without reason are rendered conceited by their merely human intellect.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They fail to maintain union with the head, to whom it is due that the whole body, nourished and knit together by the contact and connexion of every part, grows with a divine growth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Since, with Christ, you became dead to the puerile teaching of this world, why do you submit, as if you still belonged to the world,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}to such ordinances as \uc1\u8220*Do not handle, or taste, or touch\uc1\u8221*?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}For all the things referred to in them cease to exist when used. You are following mere human directions and instructions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Such prohibitions appear reasonable where there is a desire for self-imposed service, and so-called \uc1\u8220*humility,\uc1\u8221* and harsh treatment of the body, but are of no real value against the indulgence of our earthly nature.{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Since, therefore, you were raised to life with the Christ, seek for the things that are above; for it is there that the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Fix your thoughts on the things that are above, not on those that are on earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For you died, and your life now lies hidden, with the Christ, in God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}When the Christ, who is our life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Gospel in the Daily Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore destroy all that is earthly in you \uc1\u8211* immorality, uncleanness, passions, evil desires, and that greed which is idolatry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}These are the things because of which the wrath of God comes,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and to which you, like others, once devoted your lives, when you lived for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}You, however, must now lay aside all such things \uc1\u8211* anger, passion, malice, slander, abuse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Never lie to one another. Get rid of your old self and its habits,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and clothe yourselves with that new self, which, as it gains in knowledge, is being constantly renewed in resemblance to him who made it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}In that new life there is no distinction between Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, free; but Christ is all! \uc1\u8211* and in all!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore, as God\uc1\u8217*s people, consecrated and dear to him, clothe yourselves with tenderness of heart, kindliness, humility, gentleness, forbearance;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}bearing with one another, and, when there is any ground for complaint, forgiving one another freely. As the Master freely forgave you, so you must forgive one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Over all these virtues put on love; for that is the belt which makes all complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Let the peace that the Christ gives decide all doubts within your hearts; for you also were called to the enjoyment of peace as members of one body. And show yourselves thankful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Let the message of the Christ be alive in your minds in all its wealth, bringing all wisdom with it. Teach and admonish one another with psalms, and hymns, and sacred songs, full of the loving kindness of God, lifting your hearts in song to him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And, whatever you say or do, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus; and through him offer thanksgiving to God the father.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Wives, submit to your husbands, as befits those who belong to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Husbands, love your wives, and never treat them harshly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Children, always obey your parents; for that is pleasant to see in those who belong to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Fathers, never irritate your children, otherwise they might become disheartened.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Slaves, always obey your earthly masters, not only when their eyes are on you, as if you had but to please people alone, but giving them ungrudging service, in your respect for the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Whatever you do, do it with all your heart, as if working for the Master and not for people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}since you know that it is from the Master that you will receive the inheritance which will be your reward. You are serving Christ, the Master.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Those who do wrong will reap the wrong they have done; and there will be no partiality.{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Masters, do what is right and fair by your slaves, for you know that you also have a Master \uc1\u8211* in heaven.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Devote yourselves to prayer. Give your whole mind to it, and also offer thanksgiving;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and at the same time pray for us, so that God may give us an opening for our message, so that we may speak of the truths hidden in the Christ \uc1\u8211* the truths for which I am in chains!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I will make them known, as I ought to do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Show tact in your behaviour to the outside world, making the most of every opportunity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Let your conversation always be kindly, but not bland, season it, as it were, with salt; be aware in each case of the answer you should be giving.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Our dear friend, Tychicus, will tell you all about me. He is a faithful minister, and a fellow servant in the Master\uc1\u8217*s cause.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I send him to you expressly that you may learn our circumstances, and that he may give you encouragement.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}With him will be Onesimus, our dear faithful friend, who is one of yourselves. They will tell you all that is going on here.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}My fellow prisoner, Aristarchus, sends you his greeting, and Barnabas\uc1\u8217*s cousin, Mark, sends his. (You have received directions about him. If he comes to you, make him welcome.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Joshua, who is called Justus, also sends his greeting. These are the only converts from Judaism who have worked with me for the kingdom of God; I have found them a great comfort.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Epaphras, who is one of yourselves, sends you his greeting. He is a servant of Christ Jesus, and is always most earnest in your behalf in his prayers, praying that you may stand firm, with a matured faith and with a sure conviction of all that is in accordance with God\uc1\u8217*s will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I can bear testimony to the deep interest he takes in you, as well as in the followers at Laodicea and at Hierapolis.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Luke, our dear doctor, sends you his greeting, and Demas sends his.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Give my greeting to the followers at Laodicea, and to Nymphe, and to the church that meets at her house.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And when this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read before the church at Laodicea, and that you yourselves read the letter which will be forwarded from there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Give this message to Archippus \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Take care to discharge to the best of your ability the office to which you were appointed in the Master\uc1\u8217*s cause.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I, Paul, add this greeting in my own handwriting. Remember these chains of mine. God\uc1\u8217*s blessing be with you.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 1 Thessalonians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s First Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Thessalonians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To the Thessalonian church in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, from Paul, Silas, and Timothy. May God bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle and his Converts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}We always mention you in our prayers and thank God for you all;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}recalling continually before our God and Father the efforts that have resulted from your faith, the toil prompted by your love, and the patient endurance sustained by your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Friends, whom God loves, we know that he has chosen you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}because the good news that we brought came home to you, not merely as so many words, but with a power and a fulness of conviction due to the Holy Spirit. For you know the life that we lived among you for your good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And you yourselves began to follow, not only our example, but the Master\uc1\u8217*s also; and, in spite of much suffering, you welcomed the message with a joy inspired by the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and so became a pattern to all who believed in Christ throughout Macedonia and Greece.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For it was from you that the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message resounded throughout Macedonia and Greece; and, more than that, your faith in God has become known far and wide; so that there is no need for us to say another word.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Indeed, in speaking about us, the people themselves tell of the reception you gave us, and how, turning to God from your idols, you became servants of the true and living God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and are now awaiting the return from heaven of his Son whom he raised from the dead \uc1\u8211* Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Yes, friends, you yourselves know that your reception of us was not without result.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For, although we had experienced suffering and ill treatment, as you know, at Philippi, we had the courage, by the help of our God, to tell you God\uc1\u8217*s good news in spite of great opposition.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Our appeal to you was not based on a delusion, nor was it made from unworthy motives, or with any intention of misleading you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But, having been found worthy by God to be entrusted with the good news, therefore we tell it; with a view to please, not people, but God who proves our hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Never at any time, as you know, did we use the language of flattery, or make false professions in order to hide selfish aims. God will bear witness to that.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Nor did we seek to win honour from people, whether from you or from others, although, as apostles of Christ, we might have burdened you with our support.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But we lived among you with the simplicity of a child; we were like a woman nursing her own children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In our strong affection for you, that seemed to us the best way of sharing with you, not only God\uc1\u8217*s good news, but our lives as well \uc1\u8211* so dear had you become to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You will not have forgotten, friends, our labour and toil. Night and day we used to work at our trades, so as not be a burden to any of you, while we proclaimed to you God\uc1\u8217*s good news.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}You will bear witness, and God also, that our relations with you who believed in Christ were pure, and upright, and beyond reproach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Indeed, you know that, like a father with his own children, we used to encourage and comfort every one of you, and solemnly plead with you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so that you should make your daily lives worthy of God who is calling you into the glory of his kingdom.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}This, too, is a reason why we, on our part, are continually thanking God \uc1\u8211* because, in receiving the teaching that you had from us, you accepted it, not as the teaching of humans, but as what it really is \uc1\u8211* the teaching of God, which is even now doing its work within you who believe in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For you, friends, began to follow the example of the churches of God in Judea which are in union with Jesus Christ; you, in your turn, suffering at the hands of your fellow citizens, in the same way as those churches did at the hands of their people \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and persecuted us also. They do not try to please God, and they are enemies to all humanity,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}for they try to prevent us from speaking to the Gentiles with a view to their salvation, and so are always filling up the measure of their iniquity. But the wrath of God has come upon them to the full!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}As for ourselves, friends, our having been bereaved of you even for a short time \uc1\u8211* though in body only, and not in spirit \uc1\u8211* made us all the more eager to see your faces again; and the longing to do so was strong on us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}That was why we made up our minds to go and see you \uc1\u8211* at least I, Paul, did, more than once \uc1\u8211* but Satan put difficulties in our way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For what hope or joy will be ours, or what crown will we have to boast of, in the presence of our Lord Jesus, at his coming, if it isn\uc1\u8217*t you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You are our pride and our delight!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}And so, as we could bear it no longer, we made up our minds to remain behind alone at Athens,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and sent Timothy, our dear friend and God\uc1\u8217*s minister of the good news of the Christ, to strengthen you, and to encourage you in your faith,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}so that none of you should be shaken by the troubles through which you are passing. You yourselves know that we are destined to meet with such things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For, even while we were with you, we warned you beforehand that we were certain to encounter trouble. And so it proved, as you know.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore, since I could no longer endure the uncertainty, I sent to make inquiries about your faith, fearing that the Tempter had tempted you, and that our toil might prove to have been in vain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But, when Timothy recently returned to us from you with good news of your faith and love, and told us how kindly you think of us \uc1\u8211* always longing, he said, to see us, just as we are longing to see you \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}on hearing this, we felt encouraged about you, friends, in the midst of all our difficulties and troubles, by your faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For it is new life to us to know that you are holding fast to the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}How can we thank God enough for all the happiness that you are giving us in the sight of our God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you face to face, and make good any deficiency in your faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}May our God and Father himself, and Jesus, our Lord, make the way plain for us to come to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And for you, may the Lord fill you to overflowing with love for one another and for everyone, just as we are filled with love for you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and so make your hearts strong, and your lives pure beyond reproach, in the sight of our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus, with all his Holy Ones.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Advice on Daily Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Further, friends, we beg and urge you in the name of our Lord Jesus to carry out more fully than ever \uc1\u8211* as indeed you are already doing \uc1\u8211* all that you have heard from us as to what your daily life must be, if it is to please God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For you have not forgotten the directions that we gave you on the authority of our Lord Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For this is God\uc1\u8217*s purpose \uc1\u8211* that you should be pure; abstaining from all immorality;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}each of you learning to gain control over your own body, in a way that is holy and honourable,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and not for the mere gratification of your passions, like the Gentiles who know nothing of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}none of you overreaching or taking advantage of their fellow follower of the Lord in such matters. The Lord takes vengeance on all who do such things, as we have already warned you and solemnly declared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For God does not call us to an impure life, but demands holiness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Therefore the person who disregards this warning disregards, not people, but God who gives you his Holy Spirit.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}As to love for each other there is no need to write to you; for you have yourselves been taught by God to love one another;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and indeed you do act in this spirit towards all his people throughout Macedonia.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
Yet, friends, we beg you to do even more.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Make it your ambition to live quietly, and to attend to your own business, and to work with your hands, as we directed you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so that your conduct may win respect from those outside the church, and that you may not want for anything.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Dead in Christ at the coming of the Lord

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}We don\uc1\u8217*t want you to be ignorant, friends, about those who have passed to their rest. We don\uc1\u8217*t want you to grieve like other people who have no hope.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For, as we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also we believe that God will bring, with Jesus, those who through him have passed to their rest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This we tell you on the authority of the Lord \uc1\u8211* that those of us who are still living at the coming of the Lord will not anticipate those who have passed to their rest.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For, with a loud summons, with the shout of an archangel, and with the trumpet-call of God, the Lord himself will come down from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then those who died in union with Christ will rise first; and afterwards we who are still living will be caught up in the clouds, with them, to meet the Lord in the air; and so we will be for ever with the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Therefore, comfort one another with what I have told you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}But as to the times and the moments, there is no need, friends, for anyone to write to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You yourselves know well that the day of the Lord will come just as a thief comes in the night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When people are saying \uc1\u8220*All is quiet and safe,\uc1\u8221* it is then that, like birth pains on a pregnant woman, ruin comes suddenly upon them, and there will be no escape!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You, however, friends, are not in darkness, that the daylight should take you by surprise as if you were thieves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For you all are children of light and children of the day.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
We have nothing to do with night, or darkness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Therefore let us not sleep as others do. No, let us be watchful and self-controlled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It is at night that people sleep, and at night that drunkards get drunk.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But let us, who belong to the day, control ourselves, and put on faith and love as a breast plate, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For God destined us, not for wrath, but to win salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}that, whether we are still watching or have fallen asleep, we may live with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Therefore encourage one another, and try to build up one another\uc1\u8217*s characters, as indeed you are doing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}We beg you, friends, to value those who toil among you, and are your leaders in the Lord\uc1\u8217*s service, and give you counsel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Hold them in the very greatest esteem and affection for the sake of their work. Live at peace with one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We entreat you also, friends \uc1\u8211* warn the disorderly, comfort the faint-hearted, give a helping hand to the weak, and be patient with everyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Take care that none of you ever pays back wrong for wrong, but always follow the kindest course with one another and with everyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Always be joyful;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}never cease to pray;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}under all circumstances give thanks to God. For this is his will for you as made known in Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Do not quench the Spirit;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}do not make light of preaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Bring everything to the test; cling to what is good;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}shun every form of evil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}May God himself, the giver of peace, make you altogether holy; and may your spirits, souls, and bodies be kept altogether faultless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}He who calls you will not fail you; he will complete his work.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Friends, pray for us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Greet all the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers with a sacred kiss.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}I order you in the Lord\uc1\u8217*s name to have this letter read to all the brethren.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}May the blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 Thessalonians (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Second Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Thessalonians

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To the Thessalonian church in union with God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, From Paul, Silas, and Timothy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May God, the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Apostle and his Converts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Friends, it is our duty always to thank God about you, as is but right, considering the wonderful growth of your faith, and because, without exception, your love for one another is continually increasing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}So much is this the case that we ourselves speak with pride, before the churches of God, of the patience and faith which you have shown, in spite of all the persecutions and troubles that you are enduring.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}These persecutions will vindicate the justice of God\uc1\u8217*s judgment, and will result in your being reckoned worthy of God\uc1\u8217*s kingdom, for the sake of which you are now suffering;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}since God deems it just to inflict suffering on those who are now inflicting suffering on you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and to give relief to you who are suffering, as well as to us, at the appearing of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then he will inflict punishment on those who refuse to know God, and on those who turn a deaf ear to the good news of Jesus, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They will pay the penalty of unutterable ruin \uc1\u8211* banished from the presence of the Lord and from the glorious manifestation of his might,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}when he comes to be honoured in his people, and to be revered in all who have learned to believe in him (for you also believed our testimony) \uc1\u8211* as he will be on that day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}With this in view, our constant prayer for you is that our God may count you worthy of the call that you have received, and by his power make perfect your delight in all goodness and the efforts that have resulted from your faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then, in the loving kindness of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ, will the name of Jesus, our Lord, be honoured in you, and you in him.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Events that must precede the Lord\uc1\u8217*s Coming

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}As to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our being gathered to meet him, we beg you, friends,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}not lightly to let your minds become unsettled or disturbed by any revelation, or by any message or letter purporting to come from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord is come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Don\uc1\u8217*t let anyone deceive you in any way. For it will not come before the final rebellion against God, when lawlessness is revealed in human form, headed for destruction.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}He is the adversary of everything that is spoken of as a god or as an object of worship, enthroning himself in God\uc1\u8221*s Temple claiming to be God!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Don\uc1\u8217*t you remember how, when I was with you, I used to speak to you of all this?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And you know now what the restraining influence is which prevents his appearing before his appointed time.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Wickedness, indeed, is already at work in secret, but only until he who at present restrains it is removed out of the way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the lawless person will be revealed, but the Lord Jesus will destroy him with the breath of his mouth, annihilate him by the splendour of his coming.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When the lawless person comes, there will be great activity on the part of Satan, in the form of all kinds of deceptive miracles, signs, and marvels, as well as of wicked attempts to delude \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}to the ruin of those who are on the path to destruction, because they have never received and loved the truth to their own salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}That is why God places them under the influence of a delusion, to cause them to believe a lie;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}so that sentence may be passed on all those who refuse to believe the truth, but delight in wickedness.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But, friends, whom the Lord loves, it is our duty always to thank God about you, for, from the first, God chose you for salvation through the purifying influence of the Spirit, and your belief in the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}To this you were called by the good news which we brought you, to attain to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Stand firm then, friends, and hold fast to the truths that we taught you, whether by word or by letter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who loved us and, in his loving kindness, gave us unfailing consolation and good ground for hope,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}console your hearts, and strengthen you to do and to say all that is right.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}In conclusion, friends, pray for us \uc1\u8211* pray that the Lord\uc1\u8217*s message may spread rapidly, and be received everywhere with honour, as it was among you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and that we may be preserved from wrong-headed and wicked people \uc1\u8211* for it is not everyone who believes in Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But the Lord will not fail you. He will give you strength, and guard you from evil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yes, and the confidence that our union with the Lord enables us to place in you leads us to believe that you are doing, and will do, what we direct you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}May the Lord bring you to the love of God, and to the patience of the Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We beg you, friends, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to avoid any follower who is living an ill-ordered life, which is not in agreement with the teaching that you received from us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For you know well that you ought to follow our example. When we were with you, our life was not ill-ordered,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}nor did we eat anyone\uc1\u8217*s bread without paying for it. Night and day, labouring and toiling, we used to work at our trades, so as not to be a burden on any of you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This was not because we had not a right to receive support, but our object was to give you a pattern for you to copy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Indeed, when we were with you, the rule we laid down was \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Whoever does not choose to work will not get to eat.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}We hear that there are among you people who are living ill-ordered lives, and who, instead of attending to their own business, are mere busybodies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}All such people we beg, and implore, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to attend quietly to their business, and earn their own living.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}You, friends, must not grow weary of doing what is right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If anyone disregards what we have said in this letter, take note of them and avoid their company, so that they may feel ashamed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Yet do not think of them as an enemy, but caution them as you would a brother or sister.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}May the Lord, from whom all peace comes, himself give you his peace at all times and in all ways. May he be with you all.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}I, Paul, add this greeting in my own handwriting. It is my signature to every letter. This is how I write.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}May the blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 1 Timothy (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s First Letter to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Timothy

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the appointment of God, our Saviour, and Christ Jesus, our hope.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}To Timothy, my true child in the faith: May God, the Father, and Christ Jesus, our Lord, bless you, and be merciful to you, and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I beg you, as I did when I was on my way into Macedonia, to remain at Ephesus; so that you may instruct certain people there not to teach new and strange doctrines,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}nor to devote their attention to legends and interminable genealogies, which tend to give rise to argument rather than to further that divine plan which is revealed in the faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The object of all instruction is to call forth that love which comes from a pure heart, a clear conscience, and a sincere faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And it is because they have not aimed at these things that the attention of certain people has been diverted to unprofitable subjects.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They want to be teachers of the Law, and yet do not understand either the words they use, or the subjects on which they speak so confidently.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}We know, of course, that the Law is excellent, when used legitimately,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}by one who recognises that laws were not made for good people, but for the lawless and disorderly, for irreligious and wicked people, for those who are irreverent and profane, for those who ill-treat their fathers or mothers, for murderers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for the immoral, for perverts, for slave traders, for liars, for perjurers, and for whatever else is opposed to sound Christian teaching \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}as is taught in the glorious good news of the ever-blessed God, with which I was entrusted.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I am thankful to Christ Jesus, our Lord, who has been my strength, for showing that he thought me worthy of trust by appointing me to his ministry,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}though I once used to blaspheme, and to persecute, and to insult. Yet mercy was shown me, because I acted in ignorance, while still an unbeliever;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and the loving kindness of our Lord was boundless, and filled me with that faith and love which come from union with Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}How true the saying is, and worthy of the fullest acceptance, that \uc1\u8220*Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners\uc1\u8221*! And there is no greater sinner than I!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yet mercy was shown me for the express purpose that Christ Jesus might exhibit in my case, beyond all others, his exhaustless patience, as an example for those who were afterwards to believe on him and attain eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}To the eternal King, ever-living, invisible, the one God, be ascribed honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This, then, is the charge that I lay on you, Timothy, my child, in accordance with what was predicted of you \uc1\u8211* Fight the good fight in the spirit of those predictions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}with faith, and with a clear conscience; and it is because they have thrust this aside, that, as regards the faith, some have wrecked their lives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Hymenaeus and Alexander are instances \uc1\u8211* the men whom I delivered over to Satan so that they might be taught not to blaspheme.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 General Directions on Church Matters

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}First of all, then, I ask that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings should be offered for everyone,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}especially for kings and all who are in high positions, in order that we may lead a quiet and peaceful life in a deeply religious and reverent spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}This will be good and acceptable in the eyes of God, our Saviour,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}whose will is that everyone should be saved, and attain to a full knowledge of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}There is but one God, and one mediator between God and humanity \uc1\u8211* the human, Christ Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}who gave himself as a ransom on behalf of all.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
This must be our testimony, as opportunities present themselves;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and it was for this that I was myself appointed a herald and an apostle (I am telling the simple truth and no lie) \uc1\u8211* a teacher of the Gentiles in the faith and truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}My desire, then, is that it should be the custom everywhere for the men to lead the prayers, with hands reverently uplifted, avoiding heated controversy.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I also desire that women should adorn themselves with appropriate dress, worn quietly and modestly, and not with wreaths or gold ornaments for the hair, or pearls, or costly clothing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but \uc1\u8211* as is proper for women who profess to be religious \uc1\u8211* with good actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They must learn, listening quietly to their teachers and showing them all deference.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I do not consent to them becoming teachers, or exercising authority over men; they ought to not make a fuss.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Adam was formed first, not Eve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And it was not Adam who was deceived; it was the woman who was entirely deceived and fell into sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}But she will be saved by the birth of a child, if they never abandon faith, love, or holiness, and behave with modesty.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}How true is this saying:\uc1\u8220*To aspire to be to be a supervisor in the church is to be ambitious for a noble task.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The supervisor should be of blameless character; a faithful partner; living a temperate, discreet, and well-ordered life; hospitable, and a skilful teacher,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}not addicted to drink or brawling, but of a forbearing and peaceable disposition, and not a lover of money;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}they should provide for their own household well, and their children should kept under control and be well-behaved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If someone does not know how to provide for their own household, how can they take charge of the church of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The supervisor should not be a recent convert, or they might become blinded by pride and fall under the same judgement as the devil.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}They should also be well spoken of by outsiders, so that they may not incur censure and so fall into the devil\uc1\u8217*s trap.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So, too, assistants should be serious and straightforward, not given to taking much drink or to questionable money-making,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but people who hold the deep truths of the faith and have a clear conscience.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They should be tested first, and only appointed to their office if no objection is raised against them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}It should be the same with the women in this office. They should be serious, not gossips, sober, and trustworthy in all respects.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Assistants should be faithful partners who manage their children and their households well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Those who have filled that post with honour gain for themselves an honourable position, as well as great confidence through the faith that they place in Christ Jesus.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Special Directions to Timothy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I am writing this to you, though I hope that I will come to see you before long;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but in case I should be delayed, I want you to know what your conduct ought to be in the household of God, which is the church of the living God \uc1\u8211* the pillar and stay of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Yes, and undeniably wonderful are the deep truths of our religion; for \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*He was revealed in our nature,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 pronounced righteous in spirit,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 seen by angels,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 proclaimed among the Gentiles,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 believed on in the world,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 taken up into glory.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}But the Spirit distinctly says that in later times there will be some who will fall away from the faith, and devote their attention to misleading spirits, and to the teaching of demons,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}who will make use of the hypocrisy of lying teachers. These people\uc1\u8217*s consciences are seared,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and they discourage marriage and enjoin abstinence from certain kinds of food; though God created these foods to be enjoyed thankfully by those who hold the faith and have attained a full knowledge of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Everything created by God is good, and there in nothing that need be rejected \uc1\u8211* provided only that it is received thankfully;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for it is consecrated by God\uc1\u8217*s blessing and by prayer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Put all this before the followers, and you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, sustained by the precepts of the faith and of that good teaching by which you have guided your life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As for profane legends and old wives\uc1\u8217* tales, leave them alone. Train yourself to lead a religious life;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for while the training of the body is of service in some respects, religion is of service in all, carrying with it, as it does, a promise of life both here and hereafter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}How true that saying is and worthy of the fullest acceptance!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}With that aim we toil and struggle, for we have set our hopes on the living God, who is the Saviour of all, and especially of those who hold the faith.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Remember these things in your teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Do not let anyone look down on you because you are young, but, by your conversation, your conduct, your love, your faith, and your purity, be an example to those who hold the faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Until I come, apply yourself to public reading, preaching, and teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Do not neglect the divine gift within you, which was given you, amid many a prediction, when the hands of the church elders were laid on your head.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Practice these things, devote yourself to them, so that your progress may be plain to everyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Look to yourself as well as to your teaching. Persevere in this, for your doing so will mean salvation for yourself as well as for your hearers.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Do not reprimand an older man, but plead with him as if he were your father. Treat the young men as brothers,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}the older women as mothers, and the younger women as sisters \uc1\u8211* with all purity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Show consideration for widows \uc1\u8211* I mean those who are really widowed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But, if a widow has children or grandchildren, they should learn to show proper regard for the members of their own family first, and to make some return to their parents; for that is pleasing in God\uc1\u8217*s sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}As for the woman who is really widowed and left quite alone, her hopes are fixed on God, and she devotes herself to prayers and supplications night and day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But the life of a widow who is devoted to pleasure is a living death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Those are the points you should teach, so that there may be no call for your censure.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Anyone who fails to provide for their own relatives, and especially for those under their own roof, has disowned the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}A widow, when her name is added to the list, should not be less than sixty years old; she should have been a faithful wife,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and be well spoken of for her kind actions. She should have brought up children, have shown hospitality to strangers, have washed the feet of her fellow Christians, have relieved those who were in distress, and devoted herself to every kind of good action.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But you should exclude the younger widows from the list; for, when they grow restive under the yoke of the Christ, they want to marry,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and so they bring condemnation on themselves for having broken their previous promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And not only that, but they learn to be idle as they go about from house to house. Nor are they merely idle, but they also become gossips and busybodies, and talk of what they ought not.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore I advise young widows to marry, bear children, and attend to their homes, and so avoid giving the enemy an opportunity for scandal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}There are some who have already left us, to follow Satan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Any Christian woman, who has relatives who are widows, ought to relieve them and not allow them to become a burden to the church, so that the church may relieve those widows who are really widowed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Those church elders who fill their office well should be held deserving of especial consideration, particularly those whose work lies in preaching and teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The words of scripture are \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You should not muzzle the ox while it is treading out the grain.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 and again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The worker is worth their wages.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Do not entertain a charge against an church elder, unless it is supported by two or three witnesses;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}but rebuke offenders publicly, so that others may take warning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I charge you solemnly, before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels, to carry out these directions, unswayed by prejudice, never acting with partiality.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Never ordain anyone hastily, and take no part in the wrongdoing of others. Keep your life pure.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Do not continue to drink water only, but take a little wine because of the weakness of your stomach, and your frequent ailments.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}There are some people whose sins are conspicuous and lead on to judgment, while there are others whose sins dog their steps.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}In the same way noble deeds become conspicuous, and those which are otherwise cannot be concealed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}All who are in the position of slaves should regard their masters as deserving of the greatest respect, so that the name of God, and our teaching, may not be maligned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Those who have Christian masters should not think less of them because they are also followers of Christ, but on the contrary they should serve them all the better, because those who are to benefit by their good work are dear to them as their fellow Christians.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion
Those are the things to insist on in your teaching.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Anyone who teaches otherwise, and refuses their assent to sound instruction \uc1\u8211* the instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ \uc1\u8211* and to the teaching of religion,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}is puffed up with conceit, not really knowing anything, but having a morbid craving for discussions and arguments. Such things only give rise to envy, quarrelling, recriminations, base suspicions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and incessant wrangling on the part of these corrupt-minded people who have lost all hold on the truth, and who think of religion only as a source of gain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Of course religion is a great source of gain \uc1\u8211* when combined with contentment!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For we brought nothing into the world, because we cannot even carry anything out of it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}So, with food and shelter, we will be content.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Those who want to be rich fall into the net of temptation, and become the prey of many foolish and harmful ambitions, which plunge people into destruction and ruin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Love of money is a source of all kinds of evil; and in their eagerness to be rich some have wandered away from the faith, and have been pierced to the heart by many a regret.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But you must, servant of God, avoid all this. Aim at righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, gentleness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Run the great race of the faith, and win the eternal life. It was for this that you received the call, and, in the presence of many witnesses, made the great profession of faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I beg you, as in the sight of God, the source of all life, and of Christ Jesus who before Pontius Pilate made the great profession of faith \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I implore you to keep his command free from stain or reproach, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}This will be brought about in his own time by the one ever-blessed Potentate, the king of all kings and Lord of all lords,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}who alone is possessed of immortality and dwells in unapproachable light, whom no one has ever seen or ever can see \uc1\u8211* to whom be ascribed honour and power for ever. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Teach those who are wealthy in this life not to pride themselves, or fix their hopes, on so uncertain a thing as wealth, but on God, who gives us a wealth of enjoyment on every side.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Teach them to show kindness, to exhibit a wealth of good actions, to be open-handed and generous,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}storing up for themselves what in the future will prove to be a good foundation, so that they may gain the only true life.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid the profane prattle and contradictions of what some miscall \uc1\u8220*theology,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for there are those who, while asserting their proficiency in it, have yet, as regards the faith, gone altogether astray.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 God bless you all.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 Timothy (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Second Letter to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Timothy

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul who, by the will of God, is an apostle of Christ Jesus, charged to proclaim the life that comes from union with Christ Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}to Timothy, my dear child: may God, the Father, and Christ Jesus, our Lord, bless you, and be merciful to you, and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}I am thankful to God, whom I serve, as my ancestors did, with a clear conscience, when I remember you, as I never fail to do, in my prayers \uc1\u8211* night and day alike,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}as I think of your tears, longing to see you, that my happiness may be completed,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}now that I have been reminded of the sincere faith that you have shown. That faith was seen first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and is now, I am convinced, in you also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And that is my reason for reminding you to stir into flame that gift of God, which is yours through your ordination at my hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For the Spirit which God gave us was not a spirit of cowardice, but a spirit of power, love, and self-control.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Do not, therefore, be ashamed of the testimony which we have to bear to our Lord, or of me imprisoned for his sake; but join with me in suffering for the good news, as far as God enables you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It was God who saved us, and from him we received our solemn call \uc1\u8211* not as a reward for anything that we had done, but in fulfilment of his own loving purpose. For that love was extended to us, through Christ Jesus, before time began,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and has now been made apparent through the appearing of our Saviour, Christ Jesus; who has made an end of death, and has brought life and immortality to light by that good news,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}of which I was myself appointed a herald, apostle, and teacher.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}That is why I am undergoing these sufferings; yet I feel no shame, for I know in whom I have put my faith, and am convinced that he is able to guard what I have entrusted to him until that day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Keep before you, as an example of sound teaching, all that you learnt from me as you listened with that faith and love which come from union with Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Guard by the help of the Holy Spirit, who is within us, the glorious trust that has been committed to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}You know, of course, that all our friends in Roman Asia turned their backs on me, including Phygellus and Hermogenes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}May the Lord show mercy to the household of Onesiphorus; for he often cheered me and was not ashamed of my chains.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}On the contrary, when he arrived in Rome, he sought eagerly for me until he found me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The Lord grant that he may find mercy at the hands of the Lord on that day. The many services that he rendered at Ephesus you have the best means of knowing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Injunctions to Timothy

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}You must, then, my child, find strength in the help which comes from the union with Christ Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and what you learnt from me, in the presence of many listeners, entrust to reliable people, who will be able in their turn to teach others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Share hardships with me, as a true soldier of Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}A soldier on active service, to please his superior officer, always avoids entangling himself in the affairs of ordinary life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}No athlete is ever awarded the wreath of victory unless they have kept the rules.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}The labourer who does the work should be the first to receive a share of the fruits of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Reflect on what I say; the Lord will always help you to understand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Keep before your mind Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David, as told in the good news entrusted to me;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}in the service of which I am suffering hardships, even to being put in fetters as a criminal. But the message of God is not fettered;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and that is why I submit to anything for the sake of God\uc1\u8217*s people: so that they also may obtain the salvation which comes from union with Christ Jesus, and imperishable glory.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}How true this saying is \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*If we have shared his death, we will also share his life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}If we continue to endure, we will also share his throne. If we should ever disown him, he, too, will disown us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If we lose our trust, he is still to be trusted, for he cannot be false to himself!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Remind people of all this; tell them solemnly, as in the sight of God, to avoid controversy, a useless thing and the ruin of those who listen to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Do your utmost to show yourself true to God, a worker with no reason to be ashamed, accurate in delivering the message of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Avoid profane prattle. Those who indulge in it only get deeper into irreligious ways,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}and their teaching will spread like a cancer. Hymenaeus and Philetus are instances of this.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}They have gone completely astray as regards the truth; they say that a resurrection has already taken place, and so upset some people\uc1\u8217*s faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Yet God\uc1\u8217*s firm foundation still stands unmoved, and it bears this inscription \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*THE LORD KNOWS THOSE WHO ARE HIS\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 and this \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*LET ALL THOSE WHO USE THE NAME OF THE LORD TURN AWAY FROM WICKEDNESS.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Now in a large house there are not only things of gold and silver, but also others of wood and earthenware, some for better and some for common use.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}If, then, a person has escaped from the pollution of such errors as I have mentioned, they will be like a thing kept for better use, set apart, serviceable to its owner, ready for any good purpose.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Flee from the passions of youth, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, in the company of those who, with a pure heart, invoke the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Shun foolish and ignorant discussions, for you know that they only breed quarrels;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and a servant of the Lord should never quarrel. They ought, on the contrary, to be courteous to everyone, skilful teachers, and forbearing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}They should instruct their opponents in a gentle spirit; for, possibly, God may give those opponents a repentance that will lead to a fuller knowledge of truth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}and they may yet come to a sober mind, and escape from the devil\uc1\u8217*s net, when captured by the Lord\uc1\u8217*s servant to do the will of God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Be sure of this, that in the last days difficult times will come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}People will be selfish, mercenary, boastful, haughty, and blasphemous; disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, impure,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}incapable of affection, merciless, slanderous, wanting in self-control, brutal, careless of the right,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}treacherous, reckless, and puffed up with pride; they will love pleasure more than they love God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and while they retain the outward form of religion, they will not allow it to influence them. Turn your back on such people as these.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For among them are to be found those who creep into homes and captivate weak women \uc1\u8211* women who, loaded with sins, and slaves to all kinds of passions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}are always learning, and yet never able to attain to a real knowledge of the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so do these people, in their turn, oppose the truth. Their minds are corrupted, and, as regards the faith, they are utterly worthless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They will not, however, make further progress; for their wicked folly will be plain to everyone, just as the folly Jannes and Jambres was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But you, Timothy, were a close observer of my teaching, my conduct, my purposes, my faith, my forbearance, my love, and my patient endurance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}as well as of my persecutions, and of the sufferings which I met with at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. You know what persecutions I underwent; and yet the Lord brought me safe out of all!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Yes, and all who aim at living a religious life in union with Christ Jesus will have to suffer persecution;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}but wicked people and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving others and deceived themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}You, however, must stand by what you learnt and accepted as true. You know who they were from whom you learnt it;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and that, from your childhood, you have known the sacred writings, which can give you the wisdom that, through belief in Christ Jesus, leads to salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}All scripture is God-breathed: helpful for teaching, for refuting error, for giving guidance, and for training others in righteousness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}so that God\uc1\u8217*s people may be capable and equipped for good work of every kind.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}I solemnly charge you \uc1\u8211* in the sight of God and of Christ Jesus, who will one day judge the living and the dead \uc1\u8211* I charge you by his appearing and by his kingdom:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Proclaim the message, be ready in season and out of season, convince, rebuke, encourage, never failing to instruct with forbearance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For a time will come when people will not tolerate sound teaching. They will follow their own wishes, and, in their itching for novelty, procure themselves a crowd of teachers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They will turn a deaf ear to the truth, and give their attention to legends instead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But you, Timothy, must always be temperate. Face hardships; do the work of a missionary; discharge all the duties of your office.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}As for me, my life blood is already being poured out; the time of my departure is close at hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I have run the great race; I have finished the course; I have kept the faith.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And now the crown of righteousness awaits me, which the Lord, the just judge, will give me on that day \uc1\u8211* and not only to me, but to all who have loved his appearing.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Do your utmost to come to me soon,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for Demas, in his love for the world, has deserted me. He has gone to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}There is no one but Luke with me. Pick up Mark on your way, and bring him with you, for he is useful to me in my work.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Bring with you, when you come, the cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, and the books, especially the parchments.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Alexander, the coppersmith, showed much ill feeling towards me. The Lord will give him what his actions deserve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}You must also be on your guard against him, for he is strongly opposed to our teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At my first trial no one stood by me. They all deserted me. May it never be counted against them!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the Lord came to my help and strengthened me, in order that, through me, the proclamation should be made so widely that all the Gentiles should hear it; and I was rescued out of the lion\uc1\u8217*s mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The Lord will rescue me from all evil, and bring me safe into his Heavenly kingdom. All glory to him for ever and ever! Amen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Give my greeting to Prisca and Aquila, and to the household of Onesiphorus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Erastus remained at Corinth, and I left Thophimus ill at Miletus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Do your utmost to come before winter. Eubulus, Pudens, Linus and Claudia send you their greetings, and so do the rest of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}May the Lord be with your soul. God bless you all.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Titus (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Titus

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, on behalf of the faith of God\uc1\u8217*s chosen people, and their knowledge of that truth which makes for godliness{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}\uc1\u8211* and is based on the hope of eternal life, which God, who never lies, promised before the ages began,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and has revealed at his own time in his message, with the preaching of which I was entrusted by the command of God our Saviour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}To Titus, my true child in our shared faith: May God, the Father, and Christ Jesus, our Saviour, bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Mission of Titus in Crete

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}My reason for leaving you in Crete was that you might put in order what had been left unfinished, and appoint church elders in the various towns, as I myself directed you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They are to be of irreproachable character, faithful to their partners, whose children are believers in Christ and have never been open to the charge of being wild or unruly.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For a supervisor, as God\uc1\u8217*s steward, ought to be of blameless character \uc1\u8211* not arrogant or quick-tempered, not given to drunkeness, violence or shady money-making.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Instead, they should be hospitable, love what is good, self-controlled, upright, people of holy life and disciplined,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}holding firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught \uc1\u8211* so that they may be able to encourage others by sound teaching, as well as to refute those who contradict it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For there are many undisciplined persons who lead others astray with their nonsense, especially those of the group advocating the necessity of circumcision.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They need to be kept quiet as they disrupt whole households by teaching what they ought not to teach, simply to make shameful financial gain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}It was a Cretan \uc1\u8211* one of their own prophets \uc1\u8211* who said: \uc1\u8220*Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and lazy gluttons.\uc1\u8221* This statement is true.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore rebuke them sharply, so that they may be sound in the faith,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and may pay no attention to Jewish legends, or to the directions of those who turn their backs on the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}To those whose minds are pure, all things are ritually pure, but to those whose minds are tainted and unbelieving nothing is pure, as their minds and consciences are alike polluted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}They claim to know God, but by their actions they deny him. They are detestable and disobedient and useless for any good work.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}You however, should speak of such subjects as properly have a place in sound teaching.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Teach that the older men should be soberly clear minded, dignified and self-controlled \uc1\u8211* sound in faith, love, and patient endurance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}So, too, that the older women should live reverent lives, not slanderers, not slaves to excessive drinking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They should teach what is good, so as to train the younger women to love their husbands and children,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and to be self-controlled, pure-minded, to be watching over their home, to be kind, respecting the authority of their husbands, so that no one will speak badly of God\uc1\u8217*s message.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In the same way with the younger men \uc1\u8211* encourage them to be self-controlled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In all things, set an example of doing good. In your teaching, show integrity and seriousness \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}let the instruction that you give be sound and above reproach, so that those who oppose you may be ashamed when they fail to find anything bad to say about us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Tell slaves to respect their owner\uc1\u8217*s authority in all circumstances, and to try their best to please them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Teach them not to contradict or to pilfer, but to show such praiseworthy fidelity in everything, as to recommend the teaching about God our Saviour by all that they do.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For the loving kindness of God has been revealed, bringing salvation for all,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}leading us to renounce ungodliness and worldly desires, and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives here in this present age,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}while awaiting our blessed hope \uc1\u8211* the appearing in glory of our great God and Saviour, Christ Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For he gave himself on our behalf, to deliver us from all wickedness, and to purify for himself a people who should be truly his own and eager to do good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Tell them of all this, and encourage and rebuke with all authority. Do not let anyone belittle you.{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Remind them to respect and obey the rulers and authorities, to be ready for every kind of good work, to slander no one, to avoid quarrelling,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}to be reasonable, and under all circumstances to show a gentle spirit with all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}There was a time when we ourselves were foolish, disobedient, misled, enslaved to all kinds of desires and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hating ourselves and hating one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But, when the kindness of God our Saviour and his love for humanity appeared, he saved us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}not as the result of any righteous actions that we had done, but due to his mercy. He saved us though the washing of rebirth and renewal by the power of the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}which he poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}so that, having been put right with God through his grace, we become heirs to the hope of eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}This saying is trustworthy! And it is on these subjects that I want you to lay special emphasis, so that those who have learned to trust in God may be careful to devote themselves to doing good. Such subjects are excellent in themselves, and of benefit to all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But have nothing to do with foolish controversies, or with genealogies, or with quarrels, or fights about the Law. They are useless and futile.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If someone is causing divisions among you then, after giving them a second warning, excuse yourself from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}You can be sure that such a person has forsaken the truth and is in the wrong. They stand self-condemned.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As soon as I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, join me as quickly as possible at Nicopolis, for I have arranged to spend the winter there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Do your best to help Zenas, the teacher of the Law, and Apollos, on their way, and see that they want for nothing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Let all our people learn to devote themselves to doing good, so as to meet the most pressing needs, and that their lives may not be unfruitful.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All who are with me here send you their greeting. Give my greeting to our friends in the faith.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 God bless you all.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Philemon (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 Paul\uc1\u8217*s Letter to

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Philemon

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From Paul, now a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and from Timothy, a fellow follower of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}To our dear friend and fellow worker Philemon, to our sister Apphia, to our fellow soldier Archippus; and to the church that meets at Philemon\uc1\u8217*s house;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Request regarding runaway slave

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I always mention you in my prayers and thank God for you,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}because I hear of the love and the faith which you show, not only to the Lord Jesus, but also to all his people;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and I pray that your participation in the faith may result in action, as you come to a fuller realisation of everything that is good and Christlike in us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I have indeed found great joy and encouragement in your love, knowing, as I do, how the hearts of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people have been cheered, friend, by you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And so, though my union with Christ enables me, with all confidence, to dictate the course that you should adopt,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}yet the claims of love make me prefer to plead with you \uc1\u8211* yes, even me, Paul, though I am an ambassador for Christ Jesus and, now a prisoner for him as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I plead with you for this child of mine, Onesimus, to whom, in my prison, I have become a father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Once he was of little service to you, but now he has become of great service, not only to you, but to me as well;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and I am sending him back to you with this letter \uc1\u8211* though it is like tearing out of my heart.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For my own sake I should like to keep him with me, so that, while I am in prison for the good news, he might attend to my wants on your behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But I do not wish to do anything without your consent, because I want your generosity to be voluntary and not, as it were, compulsory.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}It may be that he was separated from you for an hour, for this reason, so that you might have him back for ever,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}no longer as a slave, but as something better \uc1\u8211* a dearly loved friend and follower of the Lord, especially dear to me, and how much more so to you, not only as a person, but as your fellow Christian!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If, then, you count me your friend, receive him as you would me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If he has caused you any loss, or owes you anything, charge it to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I, Paul, put my own hand to it \uc1\u8211* I will repay you myself. I say nothing about your owing me your self.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Yes, friend, let me gain something from you because of your union with the Lord. Cheer my heart by your Christlike spirit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Even as I write, I have such confidence in your compliance with my wishes, that I am sure that you will do even more than I am asking.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Please also get a lodging ready for me, for I hope that I will be given back to you all in answer to your prayers.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Messages and Blessing

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Epaphras, who is my fellow prisoner for Christ Jesus, sends you his greeting;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}and Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers, send theirs.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ rest on your souls.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Hebrews (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The Letter to the

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Hebrews

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Christ the Mediator

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}God, who, of old, at many times and in many ways, spoke to our ancestors, by the prophets,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}has in these latter days spoken to us by the Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, and through whom he made the universe.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For he is the radiance of the glory of God and the expression of his being, upholding all creation by the power of his word; and, when he had made an expiation for the sins of humanity, he took his seat at the right hand of God\uc1\u8217*s Majesty on high,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}having shown himself as much greater than the angels as the name that he has inherited surpasses theirs.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For to which of the angels did God ever say \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You are my Son; this day I have become your Father\uc1\u8221*?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 or again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will be to him a Father, and he will be to me a Son\uc1\u8221*?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And again, when God brought the firstborn into the world, he said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Let all the angels of God bow down before him.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Speaking of the angels, he said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*He makes the winds his angels
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and the flames of fire his servants\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}while of the Son he said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*God is your throne for ever and ever;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 the sceptre of his kingdom is the sceptre of Justice;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}You love righteousness and hates iniquity;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the festal oil more abundantly than your peers.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You, Lord, in the beginning did lay the foundation of the earth,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and the heavens are the work of your hands.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They will perish, but you remain;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 as a garment they will all grow old;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}As a mantle you will fold them up,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and as a garment they will be changed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but you are the same, and your years will know no end.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}To which of the angels has God ever said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Sit you at my right hand
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 until I put your enemies as a stool for your feet\uc1\u8221*?
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Are not all the angels spirits in the service of God, sent out to minister for the sake of those who are destined to obtain salvation?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Therefore we must give still more heed to what we were taught, so we do not drift away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For, if the message which was delivered by angels had its authority confirmed, so that every offence against it, or neglect of it, met with a fitting requital,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}how can we, of all people, expect to escape, if we disregard so great a salvation? It was the Master who at the outset spoke of this salvation, and its authority was confirmed for us by those who heard him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}while God himself added his testimony to it by signs, and marvels, and many different miracles, as well as by imparting the Holy Spirit as he saw fit.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}God has not given to angels the control of that future world of which we are speaking!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}No; a writer has declared somewhere \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*What are mere mortals that you should remember them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 Or human beings that you should care for them?
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}You have made them, for a while, lower than angels;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 with glory and honour you have crowned them;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 you have set them over all that your hands have made;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}you have placed all things beneath their feet.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 This \uc1\u8220*placing of everything\uc1\u8221* under humanity means that there was nothing which was not placed under them. As yet, however, we do not see everything placed under humanity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}What our eyes do see is Jesus, who was made for a while lower than angels, now, because of his sufferings and death, crowned with glory and honour; so that his tasting the bitterness of death should, in God\uc1\u8217*s loving kindness, be on behalf of all humanity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It was, indeed, fitting that God, for whom and through whom all things exist, should, when leading many children to glory, make the author of their salvation perfect through suffering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For he who purifies, and those whom he purifies, all spring from One; and therefore he is not ashamed to call them his brothers and sisters.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}He says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will tell of your name to my brothers and sisters,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 in the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*As for me, I will put my trust in God.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 And yet again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*See, here am I and the children whom God gave me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore, since human nature is the common heritage of the children, Jesus also shared it, in order that by death he might render powerless him whose power lies in death \uc1\u8211* that is, the devil \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and so might deliver all those who, from fear of death, had all their lives been living in slavery.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}It was not, surely, to the help of the angels that Jesus came, but to the help of the descendants of Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And consequently it was necessary that he should in all points be made like his brothers and sisters, in order that he might prove a merciful as well as a faithful high priest in humanity\uc1\u8217*s relations with God, for the purpose of expiating the sins of his people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The fact that he himself suffered under temptation enables him to help those who are tempted.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Therefore, my Christian friends, you who, all alike, have received the call from heaven, fix your attention on Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our religion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}See how faithful he was to the God who appointed him, as Moses was in the whole house of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He has been deemed worthy of far higher honour than Moses, just as the founder of the house is held in greater regard than the house itself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For every house has its founder, and the founder of the universe is God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}While the faithful service of Moses in the whole house of God was that of a servant, whose duty was to bear testimony to a message still to come,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}the faithfulness of Christ was that of a son set over the house of God. And we are his house \uc1\u8211* if only we retain, unshaken to the end, the courage and confidence inspired by our hope.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*If today you hear God\uc1\u8217*s voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}harden not your hearts, as when Israel provoked me
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the day when they tried my patience in the desert,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Where your ancestors tried my forbearance,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and saw my mighty deeds for forty years.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Therefore I was sorely vexed with that generation,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Their hearts are always straying;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 they have never learned my ways\uc1\u8217*;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}While in my wrath I swore \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*They will never enter upon my rest.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Be careful, friends, that there is never found in anyone of you a wicked and faithless heart, shown by that person separating themselves from the living God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Rather encourage one another daily \uc1\u8211* while there is a today \uc1\u8211* to prevent anyone among you from being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For we now all share in the Christ, if indeed we retain, unshaken to the end, the confidence that we had at the first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}To use the words of scripture \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*If today you hear God\uc1\u8217*s voice,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 harden not your hearts, as when Israel provoked me.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Who were they who heard God speak and yet provoked him? Were not they all those who left Egypt under the leadership of Moses?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And with whom was it that God was sorely vexed for forty years? Was not it with those who had sinned, and who fell dead in the desert?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And who were they to whom God swore that they should not enter upon his rest, if not those who had proved faithless?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}We see, then, that they failed to enter upon it because of their want of faith.{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}We must, therefore, be very careful, though there is a promise still standing that we will enter upon God\uc1\u8217*s rest, that none of you even appear to have missed it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For we have had the good news told us just as they had. But the message which they heard did them no good, since they did not share the faith of those who were attentive to it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Upon that rest we who have believed are now entering. As God has said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*In my wrath I swore \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*They will never enter upon my rest;\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 Although God\uc1\u8217*s work was finished at the creation of the world;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for, in a passage referring to the seventh day, you will find these words \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*God rested on the seventh day after all his work.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}On the other hand, we read in that passage \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*They will never enter upon my rest.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Since, then, there is still a promise that some will enter upon this rest, and since those who were first told the good news did not enter upon it, because of their disbelief,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}again God fixed a day. \uc1\u8220*Today,\uc1\u8221* he said, speaking after a long interval through the mouth of David, in the passage already quoted \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*If today you hear God\uc1\u8217*s voice
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 harden not your hearts.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Now if Joshua had given \uc1\u8220*rest\uc1\u8221* to the people, God would not have spoken of another and later day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}There is, then, a Sabbath rest still awaiting God\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For the person who enters upon God\uc1\u8217*s rest do themselves rest after their work, just as God did.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter upon that rest, so that none of us fall through such disbelief as that of which we have had an example.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}God\uc1\u8217*s message is a living and active power, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing its way until it penetrates soul and spirit \uc1\u8211* not the joints only but the marrow \uc1\u8211* and detecting the inmost thoughts and purposes of the mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There is no created thing that can hide itself from the sight of God. Everything is exposed and laid bare before the eyes of him to whom we have to give account.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We have, then, in Jesus, the Son of God, a great high priest who has passed into the highest heaven; let us, therefore, hold fast to the faith which we have professed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Our high priest is not one unable to sympathise with our weaknesses, but one who has in every way been tempted, exactly as we have been, but without sinning.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore, let us draw near boldly to the throne of love, to find pity and love for the hour of need.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Every high priest, taken from among the people, is appointed as their representative in their relations with God, to offer both gifts and sacrifices in expiation of sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And he is able to sympathise with the ignorant and deluded, since he is himself subject to weakness,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and is therefore bound to offer sacrifices for sins, not only for the people, but equally so for himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Nor does anyone take that high office on themselves, until they have been called to do so by God, as Aaron was.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}In the same way, even the Christ did not take the honour of the high priesthood on himself, but he was appointed by him who said to him \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You are my Son; this day I have become your Father\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and on another occasion also \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You are a priest for all time of the order of Melchizedek.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Jesus, in the days of his earthly life, offered prayers and supplications, with earnest cries and with tears, to him who was able to save him from death; and he was heard because of his devout submission.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Son though he was, he learned obedience from his sufferings;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and, being made perfect, he became to all those who obey him the source of eternal salvation,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}while God himself pronounced him a high priest of the order of Melchizedek.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now on this subject I have much to say, but it is difficult to explain it to you, because you have shown yourselves so slow to learn.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For whereas, considering the time that has elapsed, you ought to be teaching others, you still need someone to teach you the alphabet of the divine revelation, and need again to be fed with milk instead of with \uc1\u8220*solid food.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For everyone who still has to take milk knows nothing of the teaching of righteousness; they are a mere infant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But solid food is for Christians of mature faith \uc1\u8211* those whose faculties have been trained by practice to distinguish right from wrong.{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Therefore, let us leave behind the elementary teaching about the Christ and press on to perfection, not always laying over again a foundation of repentance for a lifeless formality, of faith in God \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}teaching concerning baptisms and the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead and a final judgment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yes and, with God\uc1\u8217*s help, we will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For if those who were once for all brought into the light, and learned to appreciate the gift from heaven, and came to share in the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and learned to appreciate the beauty of the divine message, and the new powers of the coming age \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}if those, I say, fell away, it would be impossible to bring them again to repentance; they would be crucifying the Son of God over again for themselves, and exposing him to open contempt.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Ground that drinks in the showers that from time to time fall on it, and produces vegetation useful to those for whom it is tilled, receives a blessing from God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}but, if it bears thorns and thistles, it is regarded as worthless, it is in danger of being cursed, and its end will be the fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But about you, dear friends, even though we speak in this way, we are confident of better things \uc1\u8211* of things that point to your salvation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For God is not unjust; he will not forget the work that you did, and the love that you showed for his name, in sending help to your fellow Christians \uc1\u8211* as you are still doing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But our great desire is that every one of you should be equally earnest to attain to a full conviction that our hope will be fulfilled, and that you should keep that hope to the end.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then you will not show yourselves slow to learn, but you will copy those who, through faith and patience, are now entering upon the enjoyment of God\uc1\u8217*s promises.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When God gave his promise to Abraham, since there was no one greater by whom he could swear, he swore by himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}His words were \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will assuredly bless you and increase your numbers.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And so, after patiently waiting, Abraham obtained the fulfilment of God\uc1\u8217*s promise.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}People, of course, swear by what is greater than themselves, and with them an oath is accepted as putting a matter beyond all dispute.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And therefore God, in his desire to show, with unmistakable plainness, to those who were to enter on the enjoyment of what he had promised, the unchangeableness of his purpose, bound himself with an oath.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For he intended us to find great encouragement in these two unchangeable things, which make it impossible for God to prove false \uc1\u8211* we, I mean, who fled for safety where we might lay hold on the hope set before us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This hope is an anchor for our souls, secure and strong, and it reaches into the sanctuary that lies behind the curtain,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}where Jesus, our forerunner, has entered on our behalf, after being made for all time a high priest of the order of Melchizedek.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Paramount Priesthood of the Christ

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}It was this Melchizedek, king of Salem and priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and gave him his blessing;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and it was to him that Abraham allotted a tithe of all the spoil. The meaning of his name is \uc1\u8220*king of righteousness,\uc1\u8221* and besides that, he was also king of Salem, which means \uc1\u8220*king of peace.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}There is no record of his father, or mother, or lineage, nor again of any beginning of his days, or end of his life. In this he resembles the Son of God, and stands before us as a priest whose priesthood is continuous.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Consider, then the importance of this Melchizedek, to whom even the patriarch Abraham himself gave a tithe of the choicest spoils.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Those descendants of Levi, who are from time to time appointed to the priesthood, are directed to collect tithes from the people in accordance with the Law \uc1\u8211* that is from their own kindred, although they also are descended from Abraham.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But Melchizedek, although not of this lineage, received tithes from Abraham, and gave his blessing to the man who had God\uc1\u8217*s promises.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Now no one can dispute that it is the superior who blesses the inferior.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}In the one case the tithes are received by people who are mortal; in the other case by one about whom there is the statement that his life still continues.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Moreover, in a sense, even Levi, who is the receiver of the tithes, has, through Abraham, paid tithes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}for Levi was still in the body of his ancestor when Melchizedek met Abraham.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}If, then, perfection had been attainable through the Levitical priesthood \uc1\u8211* and it was under this priesthood that the people received the Law \uc1\u8211* why was it still necessary that a priest of a different order should appear, a priest of the order of Melchizedek and not of the order of Aaron?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}With the change of the priesthood a change of the Law became a necessity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And he of whom all this is said belonged to quite a different tribe, no member of which has ever served at the altar.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}For it is plain that our Lord had sprung from the tribe of Judah, though of that tribe Moses said nothing about their being priests.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}All this becomes even yet plainer when we remember that a new priest has appeared, resembling Melchizedek,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and that he was appointed, not under a Law regulating only earthly matters, but by virtue of a life beyond the reach of death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for that is the meaning of the declaration \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You are for all time a priest of the order of Melchizedek.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}On the one hand, we have the abolition of a previous regulation as being both inefficient and useless{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}(for the Law never brought anything to perfection); and, on the other hand, we have the introduction of a better hope, which enables us to draw near to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Then again, the appointment of this new priest was ratified by an oath, which is not so with the Levitical priests,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}but his appointment was ratified by an oath, when God said to him \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord has sworn, and will not change, \uc1\u8216*You are a priest for all time.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And the oath shows the corresponding superiority of the covenant of which Jesus is appointed the surety.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Again, new Levitical priests are continually being appointed, because death prevents their remaining in office;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}but Jesus remains for all time, and therefore the priesthood that he holds will never pass to another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And that is why he is able to save perfectly those who come to God through him, living for ever, as he does, to intercede of their behalf.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}This was the high priest that we needed \uc1\u8211* holy, innocent, spotless, withdrawn from sinners, exalted above the highest heaven,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}one who has no need to offer sacrifices daily as those high priests have, first for their own sins, and then for those of the people. For this he did once and for all, when he offered himself as the sacrifice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}The Law appoints as high priests men who are weak, but the words of God\uc1\u8217*s oath, which was later than the Law, name the Son as, for all time, the perfect priest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}To sum up what I have been saying: Such is the high priest that we have, one who has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of God\uc1\u8217*s Majesty in heaven,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}where he serves in the sanctuary, in that true tent set up by the Lord and not by man.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Every high priest is appointed for the purpose of offering gifts and sacrifices to God; it follows, therefore, that this high priest must have some offering to make.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}If he were, however, still on earth, he would not even be a priest, since there are already priests who offer the gifts as the Law directs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}(These priests, it is true, are engaged in a service which is only a copy and shadow of the heavenly realities, as is shown by the directions given to Moses when he was about to construct the tent. \uc1\u8220*Look to it,\uc1\u8221* are the words, \uc1\u8220*that you make every part in accordance with the pattern shown you on the mountain.\uc1\u8221*){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But Jesus, as we see, has obtained a ministry as far excelling theirs, as the covenant of which he is the intermediary, based, as it is, on better promises, excels the former covenant.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}If that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no occasion for a second.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But, finding fault with the people, God says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*A time is coming,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*When I will ratify a new covenant with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Not such a covenant as I made with their ancestors
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 For they did not abide by their covenant with me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and therefore I disregarded them,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8216*This is the covenant that I will make with the people of Israel
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 after those days,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will impress my laws on their minds,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will inscribe them on their hearts;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 and I will be their God,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and they will be my people.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}There will be no need for anyone to instruct their fellow citizen,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 or for a person to say to their relatives \uc1\u8220*Learn to know the Lord\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 for everyone will know me,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 from the lowest to the highest.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For I will be merciful to their wrongdoings,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and I will no longer remember their sins.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}By speaking of a new covenant, God at once renders the former covenant obsolete; and whatever becomes obsolete and loses its force is virtually annulled.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The New Revelation and the Old

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}It is true that even the first covenant had its regulations for divine worship, and its sanctuary \uc1\u8211* though only a material one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}For a tent was constructed, with an outer part which contained the stand for the lamps, and the table, and the consecrated bread. This is called the sanctuary.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}The part of the tent behind the second curtain is called the inner sanctuary.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}In it is the gold incense-altar, and the ark containing the covenant, completely covered with gold. In the ark is a gold casket containing the manna, Aaron\uc1\u8217*s rod that budded, and the tablets on which the covenant was written;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}while above it, and overshadowing the cover on which atonement was made, are the cherubim of the presence. Now is not the time to discuss these things in detail.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Such, then, was the arrangement of the tent. Into the outer part priests are constantly going, in the discharge of their sacred duties;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but into the inner only the high priest goes, and that but once a year, and never without taking the blood of a victim, which he offers on his own behalf, and on behalf of the errors of the people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}By this the Holy Spirit is teaching that the way into the sanctuary was hidden, as long as the outer part of the tent still remained.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}For that was only a type, to continue down to the present time; and, in keeping with it, both gifts and sacrifices are offered, though incapable of satisfying the conscience of the worshiper;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}the whole system being concerned only with food and drink and various ablutions \uc1\u8211* external ceremonials imposed until the coming of the new order.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}But, when Christ came, he appeared as high priest of that better system which was established; and he entered through that nobler and more perfect tent, not made by human hands \uc1\u8211* that is to say, not a part of this present creation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Nor was it with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own blood, that he entered, once and for all, into the sanctuary, and obtained our eternal deliverance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For, if the blood of goats and bulls, and the sprinkling of the ashes of a heifer, purify those who have been defiled (as far as ceremonial purification goes),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}how much more will the blood of the Christ, who, through his eternal Spirit, offered himself up to God, as a victim without blemish, purify our consciences from a lifeless formality, and fit us for the service of the living God!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And that is why he is the intermediary of a new covenant; in order that, as a death has taken place to effect a deliverance from the offences committed under the first covenant, those who have received the call may obtain the eternal inheritance promised to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Whenever such a covenant as a will is in question, the death of the testator must of necessity be alleged.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For such a covenant takes effect only on death, it does not come into force as long as the testator is alive.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}This explains why even the first covenant was not ratified without the shedding of blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For, when every command had been announced to all the people by Moses in accordance with the Law, he took the blood of the calves and of the goats, with water, scarlet wool, and a bunch of hyssop, and sprinkled even the book of the Law, as well as all the people,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}saying, as he did so \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*This is the blood that renders valid the covenant which God has commanded to be made with you.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And in the same way he also sprinkled with the blood the tent and all the things that were used in public worship.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Indeed, under the Law, almost everything is purified with blood; and, unless blood is shed, no forgiveness is to be obtained.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}While, then, it was necessary for the copies of the heavenly realities to be purified by such means as these, the heavenly realities themselves required better sacrifices.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For it was not into a sanctuary made by human hands, which merely foreshadowed the true one, that Christ entered, but into heaven itself, so that he might now appear in the presence of God on our behalf.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Nor yet was it to offer himself may times, as year after year the high priest entered the sanctuary with an offering of blood \uc1\u8211* but not his own blood;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}for then Christ would have had to undergo death many times since the creation of the world. But now, once and for all, at the close of the age, he has appeared, in order to abolish sin by the sacrifice of himself.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And, as it is ordained for people to die but once (death being followed by judgment),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}so it is with the Christ. He was offered up once and for all, to bear away the sins of many; and the second time he will appear \uc1\u8211* but without any burden of sin \uc1\u8211* to those who are waiting for him, to bring salvation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}The Law, though able to foreshadow the better system which was coming, never had its actual substance. Its priests, with those sacrifices which they offer continuously year after year, can never make those who come to worship perfect.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Otherwise, would not the offering of these sacrifices have been abandoned, as the worshipers, having been once purified, would have had their consciences clear from sins?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But, on the contrary, these sacrifices recall their sins to mind year after year.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For the blood of bulls and goats is powerless to remove sins.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}That is why, when he was coming into the world, the Christ declared \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Sacrifice and offering you do not desire, but you provide for me a body;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You take no pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}So I said, \uc1\u8216*See, I have come\uc1\u8217* (as is written of me in the pages of the book),
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*To do your will, God.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}First come the words \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You do not desire, nor do you take pleasure in, sacrifices, offerings, burnt offerings, and sacrifices for sin\uc1\u8221* (offerings regularly made under the Law),{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and then there is added \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*See, I have come to do your will.\uc1\u8221* The former sacrifices are set aside to be replaced by the latter.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And it is in the fulfilment of the will of God that we have been purified by the sacrifice, once and for all, of the body of Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Every other priest stands day after day at his ministrations, and offers the same sacrifices over and over again \uc1\u8211* sacrifices that can never take sins away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}But, this priest, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, which should serve for all time, \uc1\u8220*took his seat at the right hand of God,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and has since then been waiting \uc1\u8220*for his enemies to be put as a stool for his feet.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}By a single offering he has made perfect for all time those who are being purified.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}We have also the testimony of the Holy Spirit. For, after saying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*\uc1\u8216*This is the covenant that I will make with them
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 after those days,\uc1\u8217* says the Lord;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8216*I will impress my laws on their hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and will inscribe them on their minds,\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}then we have \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*And their sins and their iniquities I will no longer remember.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And, when these are forgiven, there is no further need of an offering for sin.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Encouragement and Warning

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore, friends, since we may enter the sanctuary with confidence, in virtue of the blood of Jesus,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}by the way which he inaugurated for us \uc1\u8211* a new and living way, a way through the sanctuary curtain (that is, his human nature);{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and, since we have in him \uc1\u8220*a great priest set over the house of God,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}let us draw near to God in all sincerity of heart and in perfect faith, with our hearts purified by the sprinkled blood from all consciousness of wrong, and with our bodies washed with pure water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Let us maintain the confession of our hope unshaken, for he who has given us his promise will not fail us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Let us vie with one another in a rivalry of love and noble actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And let us not, as some do, cease to meet together; but, on the contrary, let us encourage one another, and all the more, now that you see the day drawing near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Remember, if we sin wilfully after we have gained a full knowledge of the truth, there can be no further sacrifice for sin;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}there is only a fearful anticipation of judgment, and a burning indignation which will destroy all opponents.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}When someone disregarded the Law of Moses, they were, on the evidence of two or three witnesses, put to death without pity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}How much worse then, think you, will be the punishment deserved by those who have trampled underfoot the Son of God, who have treated the blood that rendered the covenant valid \uc1\u8211* the blood by which they were purified \uc1\u8211* as if it were not holy, and who have outraged the Spirit of love?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}We know who it was that said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*It is for me to avenge, I will requite\uc1\u8221*;
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 and again \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord will judge his people.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Call to mind those early days in which, after you had received the light, you patiently underwent a long and painful conflict.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}Sometimes, in consequence of the taunts and injuries heaped on you, you became a public spectacle; and sometimes you suffered through having shown yourselves to be the friends of people who were in the same position in which you had been.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}For you not only sympathised with those who were in prison, but you even took the confiscation of your possessions joyfully, knowing, as you did, that you had in yourselves a greater possession and a lasting one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Do not, therefore, abandon the confidence that you have gained, for it has a great reward awaiting it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}You still have need of patient endurance, in order that, when you have done God\uc1\u8217*s will, you may obtain the fulfilment of his promise.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}\uc1\u8220*For there is indeed but a very little while
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 before he who is coming will have come, without delay;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}and through faith the righteous will find life,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but, if anyone draws back, my heart can find no pleasure in them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}But we do not belong to those who draw back, to their ruin, but to those who have faith, to the saving of their souls.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Heroes of Faith

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Faith is the realisation of things hoped for \uc1\u8211* the proof of things not seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And it was for faith that the people of old were renowned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Faith enables us to perceive that the universe was created at the bidding of God \uc1\u8211* so that we know that what we see was not made out of visible things.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Faith made the sacrifice which Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain\uc1\u8217*s, and won him renown as a righteous man, God himself establishing his renown by accepting his gifts; and it is by the example of his faith that Abel, though dead, still speaks.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Faith led to Enoch\uc1\u8217*s removal from earth, so that he might not experience death. \uc1\u8220*He could not be found because God had removed him.\uc1\u8221* For, before his removal, he was renowned as having pleased God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}but without faith it is impossible to please him, for he who comes to God must believe that God exists, and that he rewards those who seek for him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It was faith that enabled Noah, after he had received the divine warning about what could not then be foreseen, to build, in reverent obedience, an ark in which to save his family. By his faith he condemned the world, and became possessed of that righteousness which follows on faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It was faith that enabled Abraham to obey the call that he received, and to set out for the place which he was afterwards to obtain as his own; and he set out not knowing where he was going.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}It was faith that made him go to live as an emigrant in the promised land \uc1\u8211* as in a strange country \uc1\u8211* living there in tents with Isaac and Jacob, who shared the promise with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For he was looking for the city with the sure foundations, whose architect and builder is God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Again, it was faith that enabled Sarah to conceive (though she was past the age for childbearing), because she felt sure that he who had given her the promise would not fail her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so from one man \uc1\u8211* and that when his powers were dead \uc1\u8211* there sprang a people as numerous \uc1\u8220*as the stars in the heavens or the countless grains of sand on the shore.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}All these died sustained by faith. They did not obtain the promised blessings, but they saw them from a distance and welcomed the sight, and they acknowledged themselves to be only foreigners and strangers on the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Those who speak like this show plainly that they are seeking their homeland.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}If they had been thinking of the land that they had left, they could have found opportunities to return.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But no, they were longing for a better, a heavenly, land! And therefore God was not ashamed to be called their God; indeed he had already prepared them a city.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It was faith that enabled Abraham, when put to the test, to offer Isaac as a sacrifice \uc1\u8211* he who had received the promises offering up his only son,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}of whom it had been said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*It is through Isaac that there will be descendants to bear your name.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For he argued that God was even able to raise a man from the dead \uc1\u8211* and indeed, figuratively speaking, Abraham did receive Isaac back from the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}It was faith that enabled Isaac to bless Jacob and Esau, even with regard to the future.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Faith enabled Jacob, when dying, to give his blessing to each of the sons of Joseph, and \uc1\u8220*to bow himself in worship as he leant on the top of his staff.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Faith caused Joseph, when his end was near, to speak of the future migration of the Israelites, and to give instructions with regard to his bones.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}Faith caused the parents of Moses to hide the child for three months after his birth, for they saw that he was a beautiful child; and they would not respect the king\uc1\u8217*s order.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}It was faith that caused Moses, when he was grown up, to refuse the title of \uc1\u8220*son of a daughter of Pharaoh.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}He preferred sharing the hardships of God\uc1\u8217*s people to enjoying the short-lived pleasures of sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}For he counted \uc1\u8220*the reproaches that are heaped on the Christ\uc1\u8221* of greater value than the treasures of Egypt, looking forward, as he did, to the reward awaiting him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Faith caused him to leave Egypt, though undaunted by the king\uc1\u8217*s anger, for he was strengthened in his endurance by the vision of the invisible God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Faith led him to institute the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the Destroyer might not touch the eldest children of the Israelites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Faith enabled the people to cross the Red Sea, as if it had been dry land, while the Egyptians, when they attempted to do so, were drowned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 30}Faith caused the walls of Jericho to fall after being encircled for seven days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 31}Faith saved Rahab, the prostitute, from perishing with the unbelievers, after she had entertained the spies with friendliness.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 32}Need I add anything more? Time would fail me if I attempted to relate the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson, and Jephthah, and those of David, Samuel, and the prophets.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 33}By their faith they subdued kingdoms, ruled righteously, gained the fulfilment of God\uc1\u8217*s promises, shut the mouths of lions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 34}quelled the fury of the flames, escaped the edge of the sword, found strength in the hour of weakness, displayed their prowess in war, and routed hostile armies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 35}Women received back their dead raised to life. Some were tortured on the wheel, and refused release in order that they might rise to a better life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 36}Others had to face taunts and blows, and even chains and imprisonment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 37}They were stoned to death, they were tortured, they were swan asunder, they were put to the sword; they wandered about clothed in the skins of sheep or goats, destitute, persecuted, ill-used \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 38}people of whom the world was not worthy \uc1\u8211* roaming in lonely places, and on the mountains, and in caves and holes in the ground.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 39}Yet, though they all won renown by their faith, they did not obtain the final fulfilment of God\uc1\u8217*s promise;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 40}since God had in view some better thing for us, so that they would only reach perfection together with us.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Seeing, therefore, that there is on every side of us such a throng of witnesses, let us also lay aside everything that hinders us, and the sin that clings about us, and run with patient endurance the race that lies before us,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}our eyes fixed on Jesus, the leader and perfect example of our faith, who, for the joy that lay before him, endured the cross, heedless of its shame, and now \uc1\u8220*has taken his seat at the right hand\uc1\u8221* of the throne of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Weigh well the example of him who had to endure such opposition from \uc1\u8220*people who were sinning against themselves,\uc1\u8221* so that you should not grow weary or faint-hearted.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You have not yet, in your struggle with sin, resisted to the death;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and you have forgotten the encouraging words which are addressed to you as God\uc1\u8217*s children \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*My child, think not lightly of the Lord\uc1\u8217*s discipline,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 do not despond when he rebukes you;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For it is him whom he loves that he disciplines,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and he chastises every child whom he acknowledges.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It is for your discipline that you have to endure all this. God is dealing with you as his children. For where is there a child whom his father does not discipline?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}If you are left without that discipline, in which all children share, it shows that you are bastards, and not true children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Further, when our earthly fathers disciplined us, we respected them. Should we not, then, much rather yield submission to the Father of souls, and live?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Our fathers disciplined us for only a short time and as seemed best to them; but God disciplines us for our true good, to enable us to share his holiness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}No discipline is pleasant at the time; on the contrary, it is painful. But afterwards its fruit is seen in the peacefulness of a righteous life which is the lot of those who have been trained under it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore \uc1\u8220*lift again the down-dropped hands and straighten the weakened knees;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}make straight paths for your feet,\uc1\u8221* so that the lame limb may not be put out of joint, but rather be cured.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Try earnestly to live at peace with everyone, and to attain to that purity without which no one will see the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Take care that no one fails to use the loving help of God, \uc1\u8220*that no bitterness is allowed to take root and spring up, and cause trouble,\uc1\u8221* and so poison the whole community.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Take care that no one becomes immoral, or irreligious like Esau, who sold his birthright for a single meal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For you know that even afterwards, when he wished to claim his father\uc1\u8217*s blessing, he was rejected \uc1\u8211* for he never found an opportunity to repair his error \uc1\u8211* though he begged for the blessing with tears.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}It is not to tangible \uc1\u8220*flaming fire\uc1\u8221* that you have drawn near, nor to \uc1\u8220*gloom, and darkness, and storm,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and the blast of a trumpet, and an audible voice.\uc1\u8221* Those who heard that voice entreated that they might hear no more,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for they could not bear to think of the command \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*If even an animal touches the mountain, it is to be stoned to death;\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and so fearful was the sight that Moses said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*I tremble with fear.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}No, but it is to Mount Zion that you have drawn near, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to countless hosts of angels,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}to the festal gathering and assemblage of God\uc1\u8217*s firstborn whose names are enrolled in heaven, to God the judge of all people, to the spirits of the righteous who have attained perfection,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}to Jesus, the intermediary of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that tells of better things than the blood of Abel.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Beware how you refuse to hear him who is speaking. For, if the Israelites did not escape punishment, when they refused to listen to him who taught them on earth the divine will, far worse will it be for us, if we turn away from him who is teaching us from heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Then his voice shook the earth, but now his declaration is \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Still once more I will cause not only the earth to tremble, but also the heavens.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}And those words \uc1\u8220*still once more\uc1\u8221* indicate the passing away of all that is shaken \uc1\u8211* that is, of all created things \uc1\u8211* in order that only what is unshaken may remain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Therefore, let us, who have received a kingdom that cannot be shaken, be thankful, and so offer acceptable worship to God, with awe and the deepest respect.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}For our God is \uc1\u8220*a consuming fire.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Let your love for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers continue.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Do not neglect to show hospitality; for, through being hospitable, people have all unawares entertained angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Remember the prisoners, as if you were their fellow prisoners, and the oppressed, not forgetting that you also are still in the body.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Let marriage be honoured by all and the married life be pure; for God will judge those who are immoral and those who commit adultery.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Do not let your conduct be ruled by the love of money. Be content with what you have, for God himself has said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*I will never forsake you, nor will I ever abandon you.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Therefore we may say with confidence \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The Lord is my helper, I will not be afraid.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 What can mere people do to me?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Do not forget your leaders, who told you God\uc1\u8217*s message. Recall the close of their lives, and imitate their faith.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today \uc1\u8211* yes, and for ever!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Do not let yourselves be carried away by the various novel forms of teaching. It is better to rely for spiritual strength on the divine help, than on regulations regarding food; for those whose lives are guided by such regulations have not found them of service.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}We are not without an altar; but it is one at which those who still worship in the tent have no right to eat.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The bodies of those animals whose blood is brought by the high priest into the sanctuary, as an offering for sin, are burnt outside the camp.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And so Jesus, also, to purify the people by his own blood, suffered outside the gate.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore let us go out to him \uc1\u8220*outside the camp,\uc1\u8221* bearing the same reproaches as he;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}for here we have no permanent city, but are looking for the city that is to be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Through him let us offer, as our sacrifice, continual praise to God \uc1\u8211* an offering from lips that glorify his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Never forget to do kindly acts and to share what you have with others, for such sacrifices are acceptable to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Obey your leaders, and submit to their control, for they are watching over your souls, since they will have to render an account, so that they may do it with joy, and not in sorrow. That would not be to your advantage.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Pray for us, for we are sure that our consciences are clear, since our wish is to be occupied with what is good.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And I the more earnestly ask for your prayers, so that I may be restored to you the sooner.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}May God, the source of all peace, who brought back from the dead him who, \uc1\u8220*by virtue of the blood that rendered valid the unchangeable covenant, is the great shepherd of God\uc1\u8217*s Sheep,\uc1\u8221* Jesus, our Lord \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}may God make you perfect in everything that is good, so that you may be able to do his will. May he bring out in us all that is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}I beg you, friends, to bear with these words of advice. For I have written only very briefly to you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}You will be glad to hear that our friend, Timothy, has been set free. If he comes here soon, we will visit you together.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Give our greeting to all your leaders, and to all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people. Our friends from Italy send their greetings to you.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}May God bless you all.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 James (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The Letter from

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 James

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Greeting

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, greets the twelve tribes that are living abroad.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Advice on Various Subjects

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}My friends, whatever trials you may face from time to time, always regard them as a reason for rejoicing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}knowing, as you do, that the testing of your faith develops endurance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And let endurance do its work perfectly, so that you may be altogether perfect, and in no respect lacking.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}If any one of you lacks wisdom, they should ask wisdom from the God who gives freely to everyone without reproach, and it will be given to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But they should ask with confidence, never doubting; for the person who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven here and there at the mercy of the wind \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Such a person must not expect that they will receive anything from the Lord,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}vacillating as they are, irresolute at every turn.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let a follower in humble circumstances be proud of their exalted position,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}but a rich follower of their humiliation; for the rich will pass away like a wild flower.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}As the sun rises, and the hot wind blows, the plant withers, its flower fades, and all its beauty is gone. So is it with the rich. In the midst of their pursuits they will wither away.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Blessed is the person who remains firm under temptation, for, when they have stood the test, they will receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to those who love him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Let no one say, when they are tempted, \uc1\u8216*It is God who is tempting me!\uc1\u8217* For God, who cannot be tempted to do wrong, does not himself tempt anyone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}A man is in every case tempted by their own passions \uc1\u8211* allured and enticed by them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then passion conceives and gives birth to sin, and sin, on reaching maturity, brings forth death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Do not be deceived, my dear friends.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Every good thing given us, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down to us from the Father of the lights in the heavens, who is himself never subject to change or to eclipse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Because he so willed, he gave us life, through the message of the truth, so that we should be, as it were, a kind of first fruits of his creation.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Mark this, my dear friends \uc1\u8211* Let everyone be quick to listen, slow to speak, and slow to get angry;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}for human anger does not forward the righteous purpose of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Therefore, get rid of all filthiness and whatever wickedness still remains, and in a humble spirit receive that message which has been planted in your hearts and is able to save your souls.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Put that message into practice, and do not merely listen to it \uc1\u8211* deceiving yourselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}For, when anyone listens to it and does not practice it, they are like a person looking at their own face in a mirror.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}They look at themselves, then go on their way,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}but the person who looks carefully into the perfect Law, the Law of freedom, and continues to do so, not listening to it and then forgetting it, but putting it into practice \uc1\u8211* that person will be blessed in what they do.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}When a person appears to be religious, yet does not bridle their tongue, but imposes on their own conscience, that person\uc1\u8217*s religious observances are valueless.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}That religious observance which is pure and spotless in the eyes of God our Father is this \uc1\u8211* to visit orphans and widows in their trouble, and to keep oneself uncontaminated by the world.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Warning on Various Subjects

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}My friends, are you really trying to combine faith in Jesus Christ, our glorified Lord, with discrimination?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Suppose a visitor should enter your synagogue, with gold rings and in grand clothes, and suppose a poor man should come in also, in shabby clothes,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and you show more respect to the visitor who is wearing grand clothes, and say \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*There is a good seat for you here,\uc1\u8217* but to the poor man \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You must stand; or sit down there by my footstool,\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Haven\uc1\u8217*t you made distinctions among yourselves, and used evil standards of judgement?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Listen, my dear friends. Has not God chosen those who are poor in the things of this world to be rich through their faith, and to possess the kingdom which he has promised to those who love him?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But you \uc1\u8211* you insult the poor man! Isn\uc1\u8217*t it the rich who oppress you? Isn\uc1\u8217*t it they who drag you into law courts?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Isn\uc1\u8217*t it they who malign that honourable name spoken over you at your baptism?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}If you keep the royal law which runs \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must love your neighbour as you love yourself,\uc1\u8221* you are doing right;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}but, if you discriminate, you commit a sin, and stand convicted by that same law of being offenders against it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}For a person who has laid the Law, as a whole, to heart, but has failed in one particular, is accountable for breaking all its provisions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}He who said \uc1\u8220*You must not commit adultery\uc1\u8221* also said \uc1\u8220*You must not murder.\uc1\u8221* If, then, you commit murder but not adultery, you are still an offender against the Law.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore, speak and act as people who are to be judged by the \uc1\u8220*Law of freedom.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}For there will be justice without mercy for the person who has not acted mercifully. Mercy triumphs over Justice.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}My friends, what good is it if someone claims that they have faith, but they do not prove it by actions? Can such faith save them?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Suppose some brother or sister should be in need of clothes and of daily bread,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and one of you says to them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Go, and peace be with you; keep warm and eat well!\uc1\u8217* and yet you do not actually give them the necessities of life, what good would it be to them?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In just the same way faith, if not followed by actions, is, by itself, a lifeless thing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Someone, indeed, may say \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*You are a man of faith, and I am a man of action.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Then show me your faith,\uc1\u8217* I reply, \uc1\u8216*apart from any actions, and I will show you my faith by my actions.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}It is a part of your faith, is it not, that there is one God? Good; yet even the demons have that faith, and tremble at the thought.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Now do you really want to understand, fool, how it is that faith without actions leads to nothing?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Look at our ancestor, Abraham. Was he not justified by his actions after he had offered his son, Isaac, on the altar?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}You see how, in his case, faith and actions went together; that his faith was perfected as the result of his actions;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}and that in this way the words of scripture came true \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Abraham believed God, and that was regarded by God as righteousness,\uc1\u8217* and \uc1\u8216*He was called the friend of God.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}You see, then, that a person is justified by actions, and not by faith alone.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Wasn\uc1\u8217*t it the same with the prostitute, Rahab? Was she not justified by her actions, after she had welcomed the messengers and helped them escape by another road?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}Just as a body is dead without a spirit, so faith is dead without actions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Not many of you should become teachers, my friends, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly than others.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}We often make mistakes, every one of us. Anyone who does not make mistakes when speaking is indeed a perfect person, able to bridle their whole body as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When we put bits into horses\uc1\u8217* mouths to make them obey us, we change their course the rest of their bodies.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Again, think of ships. Large as they are, and even when driven by fierce winds, they are guided by a very small rudder and steered in whatever direction the man at the helm may determine.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}So is it with the tongue. Small as it is, it is a great boaster. Think how a tiny spark may set the largest forest ablaze!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And the tongue is like a spark. It is a world of unrighteousness among the parts of our body. It contaminates the whole body; it sets the whole course of our existence on fire, and is itself set on fire by the flames of Gehenna.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For while all kinds of animals, birds and reptiles and sea creatures can be tamed and have been tamed by humans,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}no human being can tame the tongue. It is a restless plague! It is charged with deadly poison!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse people who are made \uc1\u8220*in God\uc1\u8217*s likeness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}From the very same mouth come blessings and curses! My friends, it is not right that this should be so.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Does a spring give both good and bad water from the same source?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Can a fig tree, my friends, bear olives? Or a vine bear figs? No, nor can a brackish well give good water.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Who among you claims to be wise and intelligent? They should show that their actions are the outcome of a good life lived in the humility of true wisdom.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But if you harbour bitter envy and a spirit of rivalry in your hearts, do not boast or deny the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}That is not the wisdom which comes from above; no, it is earthly, animalistic, demonic.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For where envy and rivalry exist, there you will also find disorder and all kinds of bad, worthless actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But the wisdom from above is, before everything else, pure; then peace-loving, gentle, open to conviction, rich in compassion and good deeds, and free from partiality and insincerity.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Justice is the harvest peacemakers will reap from seeds sown in a spirit of peace.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}What is the cause of the fighting and quarrelling that goes on among you? Isn\uc1\u8217*t it to be found in the desires which are always at war within you?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}You crave, yet do not have, so you commit murder, so You covet, yet cannot gain your end. You quarrel and fight. You do not have, because you do not ask.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You ask, yet do not receive, because you ask for a wrong purpose \uc1\u8211* to spend what you get on your pleasures.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Unfaithful people! Don\uc1\u8217*t you know that to be friends with the world means to be at enmity with God? Therefore whoever chooses to be friends with the world makes himself an enemy to God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Do you suppose scripture means nothing when it says, \uc1\u8220*Envy results from the longings of the spirit which God has implanted within you?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But he gives us greater grace; and that is why it says, \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*God opposes the haughty,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 but gives grace to the humble.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Therefore submit to God. Stand up to the devil, and he will flee from you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Make your hands clean, you sinners; and your hearts pure, you vacillators!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Grieve, mourn, and lament! Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your happiness to gloom!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Do not disparage one another, friends. The person who disparages others, or passes judgment on them, disparages the Law and passes judgment on the Law. But, if you pass judgment on the Law, you are not obeying it, but judging it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}There is only one lawgiver and judge \uc1\u8211* he who has the power both to save and to destroy. So then who are you to pass judgment on your neighbour?
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Listen to me, you who say \uc1\u8220*Today or tomorrow we will go to such and such a town and spend a year there, doing business and making money,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}yet you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow! For you are but a puff of smoke that appears for a little while and then vanishes.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Instead you should say \uc1\u8220*If the Lord wills, we will live and do this or that.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But as it is, you are boasting presumptuously! All such boasting is wicked.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The person, then, who knows what is right but fails to do it \uc1\u8211* that is sin in them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Listen to me, you rich people, weep and wail for the miseries that are coming upon you!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Your riches have wasted away, and your clothes have become moth-eaten.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Your gold and silver are rusted; and the rust on them will be evidence against you, and will eat into your flesh. It was fire, so to speak, that you stored up for yourselves in these last days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Listen! The wages you have held back from the labourers who mowed your fields are crying out against you, and the outcries of your harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of Hosts!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You have lived on earth a life of extravagance and luxury; you have indulged your fancies in a time of bloodshed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}You have condemned, you have murdered, the righteous one! Must not God be opposed to you?
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Concluding Appeal

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Be patient, then, friends, until the coming of the Lord. Even the farmer has to wait for the precious fruit of the earth, watching over it patiently, until it has had the spring and summer rains.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And you must be patient also, and not be discouraged; for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s coming is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Do not make complaints against one another, friends, or judgment will be passed on you. The judge is already standing at the door!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Friends, as an example of the patient endurance of suffering, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}We count those who displayed such endurance blessed! You have heard, too, of Job\uc1\u8217*s endurance, and have seen what the Lord\uc1\u8217*s purpose was, for \uc1\u8220*the Lord is full of pity and compassion.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Above all things, my friends, never take an oath, either by heaven, or by earth, or by anything else. Let your \uc1\u8220*Yes\uc1\u8221* suffice for yes, and \uc1\u8220*No\uc1\u8221* for no, so that you may escape condemnation.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}If anyone of you is in trouble, they should pray; if anyone is happy, they should sing hymns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If anyone of you is ill, they should send for the church elders, and let them pray over them, anointing them with oil in the name of the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The prayer offered in faith will save the person who is sick, and the Lord will raise them from their bed; and if they have committed sins, they will be forgiven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore, confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, so that you may be cured. Great is the power of a good person\uc1\u8217*s fervent prayer.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Elijah was only human like ourselves, but, when he prayed fervently that it might not rain, no rain fell on the land for three and a half years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}And, when he prayed again, the clouds brought rain, and the land bore crops.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}My friends, should one of you be led astray from the truth, and someone bring them back again,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}be sure that the person who brings a sinner back from their mistaken ways will save that person\uc1\u8217*s soul from death, and will cover a multitude of sins.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 1 Peter (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Peter\uc1\u8217*s First Letter

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To the people of God who are living abroad, dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Roman Asia, and Bithynia,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and who were chosen in accordance with the foreknowledge of God the Father, through the consecration of the Spirit, to learn obedience, and to be purified by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, from Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ. May blessing and peace be yours in ever increasing measure.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Christian\uc1\u8217*s Hope of Salvation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has, in his great mercy, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}given us the new life of undying hope, that promises an inheritance, imperishable, stainless, unfading, which has been reserved for you in heaven \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}for you who, through faith, are being guarded by the power of God, awaiting a salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last days.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}At the thought of this you are full of exultation, though (if it has been necessary) you have suffered for the moment somewhat from various trials;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}that the genuineness of your faith \uc1\u8211* a thing far more precious than gold, which is perishable, yet has to be tested by fire \uc1\u8211* may win praise and glory and honour at the appearing of Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Though you have never seen him, yet you love him; though you do not even now see him, yet you believe in him, and exalt with a triumphant happiness too great for words,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}as you receive the reward of your faith in the salvation of your souls!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}It was this salvation that the prophets, who spoke long ago of the blessing intended for you, sought, and strove to comprehend;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}as they strove to discern what that time could be, to which the Spirit of Christ within them was pointing, when foretelling the sufferings that Christ would have to endure, and the glories that would follow.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And it was revealed to them that it was not for themselves, but for you, that they were acting as Ministers of the truths which have now been told to you, by those who, with the help of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, have brought you the good news \uc1\u8211* truths into which even angels long to look.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Christian\uc1\u8217*s Character

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Therefore concentrate your minds, with the strictest self-control, and fix your hopes on the blessing that is coming for you at the appearing of Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Be like obedient children; do not let your lives be shaped by the passions which once swayed you in the days of your ignorance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}but in your whole life show yourselves to be holy, after the pattern of the Holy One from whom you received your call.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For scripture says \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You will be holy, because I am holy.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And since you call on him as \uc1\u8220*Father,\uc1\u8221* who judges everyone impartially by what he has done, let respectful awe be the spirit of your lives during the time of your stay on earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For you know that it was not by perishable things, such as silver and gold, that you were ransomed from the aimless way of living which was handed down to you from your ancestors,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}but by precious blood, as it were of a lamb, unblemished and spotless, the blood of Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Destined for this before the beginning of the world, he has been revealed in these last days for your sakes,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}who, through him, are faithful to God who raised him from the dead and gave him honour, so that your faith and hope are now in God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Now that, by your obedience to the truth, you have purified your lives, so that there is growing up among you a genuine affection, love one another earnestly with all your hearts;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}since your new life has come, not from perishable, but imperishable, seed, through the message of the Everliving God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}For \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*All earthly life is but as grass,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and all its splendour as the flower of grass.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 The grass fades,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 its flower falls,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}but the teaching of the Lord remains for ever.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
 And that is the teaching of the good news which has been told to you.{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}Now that you have done with all malice, all deceitfulness, insincerity, jealous feelings, and all backbiting,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}like newly born infants, crave pure spiritual milk, so that you may be enabled by it to grow until you attain salvation \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}since \uc1\u8220*you have found by experience that the Lord is kind.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Come to him, then, as to a living stone, rejected, indeed, by men, but in God\uc1\u8217*s eyes choice and precious;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and, as living stones, form yourselves into a spiritual house, to be a consecrated priesthood, for the offering of spiritual sacrifices that will be acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For there is a passage of scripture that runs \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*See, I am placing in Zion a choice and precious cornerstone;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and those who believe in him will have no cause for shame.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It is to you, then, who believe in him that he is precious, but to those who do not believe he is \uc1\u8220*a stone which, though rejected by the builders, has now itself become the corner-stone,\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and \uc1\u8220*a stumbling-block, and a rock which will prove a hindrance.\uc1\u8221* They stumble because they do not accept the message. This was the fate destined for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But you are \uc1\u8220*a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a consecrated nation, God\uc1\u8217*s own people,\uc1\u8221* entrusted with the proclamation of the goodness of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Once you were \uc1\u8220*not a people,\uc1\u8221* but now you are \uc1\u8220*God\uc1\u8217*s people\uc1\u8221*; once you \uc1\u8220*had not found mercy,\uc1\u8221* but now you \uc1\u8220*have found mercy.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Practical Appeals in view of the Dangers of the Times.

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Dear friends, I beg you, as pilgrims and strangers on earth, to refrain from indulging the cravings of your earthly nature, for they make war on the soul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Let your daily life among the Gentiles be so upright, that, whenever they malign you as evildoers, they may learn, as they watch, from the uprightness of your conduct, to praise God \uc1\u8220*at the time when he will visit them.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Submit to all human institutions for the Lord\uc1\u8217*s sake, alike to the emperor as the supreme authority,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and to governors as sent by him to punish evildoers and to commend those who do right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}For God\uc1\u8217*s will is this \uc1\u8211* that you should silence the ignorance of foolish people by doing what is right.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Act as free people, yet not using your freedom as those do who make it a cloak for wickedness, but as Servants of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Show honour to everyone, love the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers, \uc1\u8220*revere God, honour the emperor.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Those of you who are domestic servants should always be submissive and respectful to their masters, not only to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are arbitrary.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}For this wins God\uc1\u8217*s approval when, because conscious of God\uc1\u8217*s presence, a person who is suffering unjustly bears their troubles patiently.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}What credit can you claim when, after doing wrong, you take your punishment for it patiently? But, on the other hand, if, after doing right, you take your sufferings patiently, that does win the approval of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}For it was to this that you were called! For Christ, too, suffered \uc1\u8211* on your behalf \uc1\u8211* and left you an example, that you should follow in his steps.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}He \uc1\u8220*never sinned, nor was anything deceitful ever heard from his lips.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}He was abused, but he did not answer with abuse; he suffered, but he did not threaten; he entrusted himself to him whose judgments are just.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}And he \uc1\u8220*himself carried our sins\uc1\u8221* in his own body to the cross, so that we might die to our sins, and live for righteousness. \uc1\u8220*His bruising was your healing.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Once you were straying like sheep, but now you have returned to the shepherd and guardian of your souls.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}Again, you married women should submit to your husbands, so that if any of them reject the message, they may, apart from the message, be won over, by the conduct of their wives,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}as they see your pure, reverent conduct.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Yours should be, not the external adornment of the arrangement of the hair, the wearing of jewellery, or the putting on of dresses,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}but the inner life with the imperishable beauty of a quiet and gentle spirit; for this is very precious in God\uc1\u8217*s sight.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}It was by this that the holy women of old, who rested their hopes on God, adorned themselves; submitting to their husbands,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}as Sarah did, who obeyed Abraham, and called him master. And you are her true children, as long as you live good lives, and let nothing terrify you.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Again, those of you who are married men should live considerately with their wives, showing due regard to their sex, as physically weaker than their own, and not forgetting that they share with you in the gift of life. Then you will be able to pray without hindrance.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Lastly, you should all be united, sympathetic, full of love for each other, kind-hearted, humble-minded;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}never returning evil for evil, or abuse for abuse, but, on the contrary, blessing. It was to this that you were called \uc1\u8211* to obtain a blessing!
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}\uc1\u8220*The person who wants to enjoy life
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and see happy days \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 they should keep their tongue from evil
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and their lips from deceitful words,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}they should turn from evil and do good,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 They should seek for peace and follow after it;
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and his ears are attentive to their prayers,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-1720\li2800
 but the face of the Lord is set against those who do wrong.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Who, indeed, is there to harm you, if you prove yourselves to be eager for what is good?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Even if you should suffer for righteousness, count yourselves blessed! \uc1\u8220*Do not let people terrify you, or allow yourselves to be dismayed.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Revere the Christ as Lord in your hearts; always ready to give an answer to anyone who asks your reason for the hope that you cherish, but giving it with courtesy and respect,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and keeping your consciences clear, so that, whenever you are maligned, those who vilify your good and Christian conduct may be put to shame.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}It is better that you should suffer, if that should be God\uc1\u8217*s will, for doing right, than for doing wrong.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}For Christ himself died to atone for sins once for all \uc1\u8211* the good on behalf of the bad \uc1\u8211* that he might bring you to God; his body being put to death, but his spirit entering on new life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And it was then that he went and preached to the imprisoned spirits,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}who once were disobedient, at the time when God patiently waited, in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared; in which some few lives, eight in all, were saved by means of water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}And baptism, which this foreshadowed, now saves you \uc1\u8211* not the mere cleansing of the body, but the search of a clear conscience after God \uc1\u8211* through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}who has gone into heaven, and is at God\uc1\u8217*s right hand, where angels and archangels and the powers of heaven now yield submission to him.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Since, then, Christ suffered in body, arm yourselves with the same resolve as he; for he who has suffered in body has ceased to sin,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and so will live the rest of his earthly life guided, not by human passions, but by the will of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Surely in the past you have spent time enough living as the Gentiles delight to live. For your path has lain among scenes of debauchery, licentiousness, drunkenness, revelry, hard-drinking, and profane idolatry.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And, because you do not run to the same extremes of profligacy as others, they are astonished, and malign you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But they will have to answer for their conduct to him who is ready to judge both the living and the dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}For that was why the good news was told to the dead also \uc1\u8211* that, after they have been judged in the body, as people are judged, they might live in the spirit, as God lives.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But the end of all things is near. Therefore exercise self-restraint and be calm, so that you may be able to pray.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Above all things, let your love for one another be earnest, for \uc1\u8220*Love throws a veil over countless sins.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Never grudge hospitality to one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Whatever the gift that each has received, use it in the service of others, as good stewards of the varied bounty of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}When anyone speaks, they should speak as one who is delivering the oracles of God. When anyone is endeavouring to serve others, they should do so in reliance on the strength which God supplies; so that in everything God may be honoured through Jesus Christ \uc1\u8211* to whom be ascribed all honour and might for ever and ever. Amen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Dear friends, do not be astonished at the trial of fire that you are passing through, to test you, as though something strange were happening to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}No, the more you share the sufferings of the Christ, the more may you rejoice, that, when the time comes for the manifestation of his glory, you may rejoice and exult.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}If you are insulted for bearing the name of Christ, count yourselves blessed; because the divine glory and the Spirit of God are resting on you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I need hardly say that no one among you must suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or a criminal, or for interfering in matters which do not concern Christians.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But, if someone suffers as a Christian, they should not be ashamed of it; they should bring honour to God even though they bear that name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For the time has come for judgment to begin with the house of God; and, if it begins with us, what will be the end of those who reject God\uc1\u8217*s good news?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}If \uc1\u8220*a good person is saved only with difficulty, what will become of the godless and the sinful?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore, I say, let those who suffer, because God wills it so, commit their lives into the hands of a faithful Creator, and persevere in doing right.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}As for the older ones among you, who are elders in the church, I, their fellow elder, and a witness to the sufferings of the Christ, who will also share in the glory that is to be revealed \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I beg you to be true shepherds of the flock of God among you, not because you are compelled, but of your own free will; not from a base love of gain, but with a ready spirit;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}not as lords of your charges, but as examples to your flock.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then, when the chief shepherd appears, you will win the crown of glory that never fades.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Again, you younger ones should show deference to the older. And all of you should put on the badge of humility in mutual service, for \uc1\u8220*God is opposed to the proud, but gives his help to the humble.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in his good time,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}laying all your anxieties on him, for he makes you his care.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Exercise self-control, be watchful. Your adversary, the devil, like a roaring lion, is prowling about, eager to devour you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Stand firm against him, strong in your faith; knowing, as you do, that the sufferings which you are undergoing are being endured to the full by the Lord\uc1\u8217*s followers throughout the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}God, from whom all help comes, and who called you, by your union with Christ, into his eternal glory, will, when you have suffered for a little while, himself perfect, establish, strengthen you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}To him be ascribed dominion for ever. Amen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I have been writing to you briefly by the hand of Silas, our true-hearted friend (for so I regard him), to encourage you, and to bear my testimony that in what I have written is to be found the true love of God. On that take your stand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Your sister church in \uc1\u8220*Babylon\uc1\u8221* sends you greeting, and so does Mark, who is as a son to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Greet one another with the kiss of love.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
May God give his peace to you all in your union with Christ.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 Peter (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Peter\uc1\u8217*s Second Letter

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To those to whom, through the justice of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ, there has been granted faith equally privileged with our own, from Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May blessing and peace be yours in ever increasing measure, as you advance in the knowledge of God and of Jesus, our Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For his divine power has given us everything that is needful for a life of piety, as we advance in the knowledge of him who called us by a glorious manifestation of his goodness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For it was through this that he gave us what we prize as the greatest of his promises, that through them you might participate in the divine nature, now that you have fled from the corruption in the world, resulting from human passions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yes, and for this reason do your best to supplement your faith by goodness, goodness by knowledge,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}knowledge by self-control, self-control by endurance, endurance by piety,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}piety by mutual affection, and mutual affection by love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}For, when these virtues are yours, in increasing measure, they prevent your being indifferent to, or destitute of, a fuller knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Surely the person who has not these virtues is shortsighted even to blindness, and has chosen to forget that they have been purified from their sins of the past!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Therefore, friends, do your best to put God\uc1\u8217*s call and selection of you beyond all doubt; for, if you do this, you will never fall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For in this way you will be given a triumphant admission into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Transfiguration and the \uc1\u8220*Second Coming\uc1\u8221* of the Christ

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I will, therefore, always be ready to remind you of all this, even though you know it and are firmly established in the truth that you now hold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}But I think it my duty, as long as I live in this \uc1\u8220*tent,\uc1\u8221* to rouse you by awakening memories of the past;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}for I know that the time for this \uc1\u8220*tent\uc1\u8221* of mine to be put away is soon coming, as our Lord Jesus Christ himself assured me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}So I will do my best to enable you, at any time after my departure, to call these truths to mind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For we were not following cleverly devised stories when we told you of the coming in power of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we had been eye-witnesses of his majesty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For he received honour and glory from God the Father, when from the glory of the Divine Majesty there were borne to his ears words such as these \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*This is my dearly loved son, who brings me great joy.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}These were the words that we heard, borne to our ears from heaven, when we were with him on that sacred mountain.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}And still stronger is the assurance that we have in the teaching of the prophets; to which you will do well to pay attention (as if it were a lamp shining in a gloomy place), until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But first be assured of this: There is no prophetic teaching found in scripture that can be interpreted by a person\uc1\u8217*s unaided reason;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}for no prophetic teaching ever came in the old days at the mere wish of people, but people, moved by the Holy Spirit, spoke direct from God.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Warning against separating Christianity from a Holy Life

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}But there were false prophets also in the nation, just as there will be false teachers among you, people who will secretly introduce ruinous divisions, disowning even the Lord who bought them, and bringing speedy ruin on themselves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}There will be many, too, who will follow their licentious courses, and cause the way of the truth to be maligned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}In their covetousness they will try to make you a source of profit by their fabrications; but for a long time past their sentence has not been standing idle, nor their ruin slumbering.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Remember, God did not spare angels when they sinned, but sent them down to Tartarus, and consigned them to caverns of darkness, to be kept under guard for judgment.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Nor did he spare the world of old; though he preserved Noah, the preacher of righteousness, and seven others, when he brought a flood on the godless world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}He condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah and reduced them to ashes, holding them up as a warning to the godless of what was in store for them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but he rescued righteous Lot, whose heart was vexed by the wanton licentiousness of his neighbours;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}for, seeing and hearing what he did, as he lived his righteous life among them, day after day, Lot\uc1\u8217*s righteous soul was tortured by their wicked doings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The Lord, therefore, knows how to deliver the pious from temptation, and to keep the wicked, who are even now suffering punishment, in readiness for \uc1\u8220*the day of judgment\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}especially those who, following the promptings of their lower nature, indulge their polluting passions and despise all control. Audacious and self-willed, they feel no awe of the celestial beings, maligning them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}even where angels, though excelling them in strength and power, do not bring against them a malignant charge before the Lord.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}These people, however, like animals without reason, intended by nature to be caught and killed \uc1\u8211* these people, I say, malign those of whom they know nothing, and will assuredly perish through their own corruption,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}suffering themselves, as the penalty for the suffering that they have inflicted. They think that pleasure consists in the self-indulgence of the moment. They are a stain and a disgrace, indulging, as they do, in their wanton revelry, even while joining you at your feasts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They have eyes only for adulteresses, eyes never tired of sin; they entice weak souls; their minds are trained to covet; they live under a curse.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Leaving the straight road, they have gone astray and followed in the steps of Balaam, the son of Beor, who set his heart on the reward for wrongdoing,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}but was rebuked for his offence. A dumb animal spoke with a human voice, and checked the prophet\uc1\u8217*s madness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}These people are like springs without water, or mists driven before a gale; and for them the blackest darkness has been reserved.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}With boastful and foolish talk, they appeal to the passions of people\uc1\u8217*s lower nature, and, by their profligacy, entice those who are just escaping from the people who live such misguided lives.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves to corrupt habits; for a person is the slave of anything to which they give way.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}If, after having escaped the polluting influences of the world, through knowing our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, people are again entangled in them, and give way to them, their last state has become worse than their first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}It would, indeed, have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn away from the holy command delivered to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}In their case is seen the truth of the proverb \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*A dog returns to what it has vomited\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*A sow after washing to her wallowing-place in the mud.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A Reassertion of the \uc1\u8220*Second Coming\uc1\u8221* of the Christ

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}This, dear friends, is my second letter to you. In both of them I have tried, by appealing to your remembrance, to arouse your better feelings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I want you to recall what was foretold by the holy prophets, as well as the command of our Lord and Saviour given to you through your apostles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}First be assured of this, that, as the age draws to an end, scoffers, led by their own passions,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}will come and ask scoffingly \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Where is his promised coming? Ever since our ancestors passed to their rest, everything remains just as it was when the world was first created!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For they wilfully shut their eyes to the fact that long ago the heavens existed; and the earth, also \uc1\u8211* formed out of water and by the action of water, by the fiat of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and that by the same means the world which then existed was destroyed in a deluge of water.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But the present heavens and earth, by the same fiat, have been reserved for fire, and are being kept for the day of the judgment and destruction of the godless.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But you, dear friends, must never shut your eyes to the fact that, to the Lord, one day is the same as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The Lord is not slow to fulfil his promise, as some count slowness; but he is forbearing with you, as it is not his will that any of you should perish, but that all should be brought to repentance.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The day of the Lord will come like a thief; and on that day the heavens will pass away with a crash, the elements will be burnt up and dissolved, and the earth and all that is in it will be disclosed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Now, since all these things are in the process of dissolution, think what you yourselves ought to be \uc1\u8211* what holy and pious lives you ought to lead,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}while you wait for the coming of the day of God and strive to make it come soon{\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   Or: and desire its coming. }. At its coming the heavens will be dissolved in fire, and the elements melted by heat,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}but we look for new heavens and a new earth, where righteousness will have its home, in fulfilment of the promise of God.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Therefore, dear friends, in expectation of these things, make every effort to be found by him spotless, blameless, and at peace.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Regard our Lord\uc1\u8217*s forbearance as your one hope of salvation. This is what our dear friend Paul wrote to you, with the wisdom that God gave him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}It is the same in all his letters, when he speaks in them about these subjects. There are some things in them difficult to understand, which untaught and weak people distort, just as they do all other writings, to their own ruin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}You must, therefore, dear friends, now that you know this beforehand, be on your guard against being led away by the errors of reckless people, and so lapsing from your present steadfastness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and advance in the love and knowledge of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. All glory be to him now and for ever.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 1 John (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 John\uc1\u8217*s First Letter

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Preface

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}We write to you about the Word of life, which has been in existence from the beginning. We write of what we have heard, of what we have seen with our eyes, of what we watched reverently and touched with our hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}That life was made visible, and we have seen it. We bear our testimony to it, and tell you of that eternal life which was with the Father and was made visible to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}It is of what we have seen and heard that we now tell you, so that you may have fellowship with us. And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son, Jesus Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}We are writing all this to you that our joy may be complete.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Fellowship with God

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}This is the message which we have heard from him and announce to you: God is light, and there is no darkness in him at all.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}If we say that we have fellowship with him and yet continue to walk in the darkness, our words and our lives are a lie.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, cleanses us from all sin.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}If we say, \uc1\u8216*we have no sin,\uc1\u8217* then we are deceiving ourselves, and the truth is not in us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}If we confess our sins, he is just and may be trusted to forgive our sins and cleanse us from all wrongdoing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If we say that we haven\uc1\u8217*t sinned, we make God a liar, and his Word is not in us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}My children, I am writing to you to keep you from sinning. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father \uc1\u8211* Jesus Christ, the righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours only, but the sins of the whole world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}It is by keeping God\uc1\u8217*s commands that we can be sure we know him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Whoever says \uc1\u8216*I know him,\uc1\u8217* but does not keep his commands, is a liar. The truth has no place in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But the person who keeps God\uc1\u8217*s word, in them the love of God has indeed reached its perfection. This is how we can be sure we are in him:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}whoever claims to live in him should live just as Jesus did.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 A new commandment

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Dear friends, it is no new command that I am writing to you, but an old command, which you have had from the beginning. That old command is the message you have already heard.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Yet, in a way, it is a new command that I am writing to you \uc1\u8211* which is shown true in Christ\uc1\u8217*s life and in yours \uc1\u8211* for the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}The person who says that they are in the light, and yet hates others, is still in the darkness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The person who loves others is always in the light, and there is nothing within them to cause them to stumble.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The person who hates is in the dark. They stumble along in the darkness; they do not know where they are going because the darkness blinds them.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Those who know God should not love the world

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 

\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Little children, I am writing to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because your sins have been forgiven for Christ\uc1\u8217*s sake.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Parents, I am writing to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you have come to know him who has been from the beginning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Young people, I am writing to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you have conquered the evil one.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Children, I write to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you have come to know the Father.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Parents, I write to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you have learned to know him who has been from the beginning.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 Young people, I write to you
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 because you are strong,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and God\uc1\u8217*s message is always in your hearts,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2080\li2800
 and you have conquered the evil one.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Do not love the world or what the world can offer. When anyone loves the world, there is no love for the Father in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}For all that the world can offer \uc1\u8211* the desires for physical pleasure, the enticements to the eye, the arrogance of wealth \uc1\u8211* belongs, not to the Father, but to the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And the world, and all that it gratifies, is passing away, but they who do God\uc1\u8217*s will remain for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Warnings against an antichrist

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}My children, it is the last hour. You were told that an antichrist was coming; and many antichrists have already arisen. This is why we know that this is the last hour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}These people come from our ranks, but they were never truly part of us \uc1\u8211* if they had been then they would have stayed with us. They left so it would be clear that none of them really belonged to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}You, however, have been annointed by the Holy One. You all know the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I am not writing to you because you do not know the truth, but because you do know it, and because no lie can come from the truth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Who is a liar, if not the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? That person is the antichrist \uc1\u8211* one who rejects the Father and the Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}No one who rejects the Son has the Father; to acknowledge the Son is to have the Father also.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}As for you, you must let what you have heard from the beginning continue to live in you. If what you heard from the beginning dwells in you, you will remain both in the Son and the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}And this is what he himself promised us \uc1\u8211* eternal life!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}In writing this to you, I have in mind those who are trying to mislead you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}As for you, the anointing which you received from him remains with you. You do not need anyone to teach you. His anointing teaches you about everything. What it teaches you is true, it is not a lie. Do what it has taught you: abide in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}Yes, my children, remain in him, so that when he appears our confidence doesn\uc1\u8217*t fail us, and we are not ashamed to meet him at his coming.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Since you know he is righteous, you realise that everyone who does what is right is his child.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God\uc1\u8217*s Children

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}See what great love the Father has lavished on us: he lets us be called God\uc1\u8217*s children! For that is what we are. The reason why the world does not know us is that it has not learned to know him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Dear friends, we are God\uc1\u8217*s children now, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. What we do know is that, when it is revealed, we will be like him, because we will see him as he is.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And just as he is pure, everyone who has this hope, makes and keeps themselves pure.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Everyone who lives sinfully is living in violation of God\uc1\u8217*s law. Sin is lawlessness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}You know that Christ appeared to take away our sins and that there is no sin in him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}No one who lives in him continues to sin; the sinner has not seen or known him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}My children, don\uc1\u8217*t let anyone mislead you. The person who does what is right is righteous, just as Christ is righteous.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The person who lives in sin is a child of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. To undo the devil\uc1\u8217*s work is the reason the Son of God appeared.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}No child of God sins, because God\uc1\u8217*s nature dwells in them. They can\uc1\u8217*t live in sin, because they are God\uc1\u8217*s children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}By this it is made clear who are the children of God and who are the devil\uc1\u8217*s: anyone who doesn\uc1\u8217*t do what is right or doesn\uc1\u8217*t love others is not a child of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}For this is the message we heard from the beginning: we are to love one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}We must not be like Cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. Why did he kill him? Because his actions were evil, and his brother\uc1\u8217*s were righteous.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Love each other

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Do not be suprised, friends, if the world hates you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love each other. The person who does not love remains in a state of death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The person who hates another is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life dwelling within them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}This is how we know what love is: Christ gave his life for us. So we should lay down our own lives for each other.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}If anyone has material possessions, and sees one of our own in need, but closes their heart against that person, how can it be said that the love of God is within them?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}My children, our love must not be mere words or talk. It must be true and show itself in actions.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}This is how we will know we belong to the truth and reassure ourselves in God\uc1\u8217*s presence:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}though our conscience condemns us, God is greater than our conscience and knows everything.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Dear friends, if our conscience does not condemn us, then we approach God with confidence,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}and we receive from him whatever we ask, because we are keeping his commands, and are doing what pleases him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}His command is that we should believe in his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another, as Christ commanded us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The person who keeps his commands dwells in God and God dwells in them. And we are sure he lives in us because of the Spirit he has given us.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 True and False Inspiration

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}Dear friends, do not trust every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}This is the way to recognise the Spirit of God: those who acknowledge Jesus Christ as come in the flesh have God\uc1\u8217*s Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}while a spirit that doesn\uc1\u8217*t acknowledge Jesus isn\uc1\u8217*t from God. Instead it is the spirit of the antichrist; you have heard that it was coming, and it is now already in the world!
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}You, my children, come from God, and you have successfully resisted such people as these, because he who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Those people belong to the world and therefore they speak as the world speaks, and the world listens to them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}We come from God. Whoever knows God listens to us; the person who does not come from God does not listen to us. This is how we distinguish the spirit of truth and the spirit of deception.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 God is love

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Dear friends, let us love one another, because love comes from God and everyone who loves is a child of God and knows God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Those who do not love know nothing of God, for God is love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}This is how God showed his love among us: he sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}This is what love is: it is not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son to be an atoning sacrifice for our sins.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Dear friends, since God loved us in this way, we should love one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}No one has ever seen God, but if we love one another, God lives in us and his love reaches perfection within us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}We know that we live in him, and he lives in us, because he has given us a measure of his Spirit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Moreover, we have seen for ourselves and testify that the Father has sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Whoever acknowledges that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, God lives in them, and they live in God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And so we have come to know and believe the love which God has for us.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
God is love; and whoever lives in love lives in God, and God lives in them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}This is the way love has reached its perfection among us, so that we may have confidence on the day of judgment, because in this world we are like Christ.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}There is no fear in love; perfect love drives out fear because fear has to do with punishment. So anyone who is afraid has not reached perfection in love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}We love, because God first loved us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}If someone says \uc1\u8220*I love God,\uc1\u8221* and yet hates others, they are a liar. For the person who does not love their brother or sister, whom they have seen, cannot love God, whom they have not seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Indeed, we have this command from Christ: Those who love God must also love each other.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Faith and Confidence

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is a child of God, and everyone who loves a parent loves his child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}By this we know that we love God\uc1\u8217*s children \uc1\u8211* when we love God and carry out his commands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For to love God is to do what he commands and his commands are not a burden,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}for whatever is born of God overcomes the world. What is the victory by which the world is overcome? Our faith!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Who can overcome the world but the person who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Jesus Christ, the one who came by water and blood \uc1\u8211* not by water only but by water and blood \uc1\u8211* and the Spirit testifies to this because the Spirit is truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Indeed three testify:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}We accept human testimony, surely God\uc1\u8217*s testimony is even stronger! And God\uc1\u8217*s testimony is the testimony he has given about his Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}The person who believes in the Son of God has that testimony within them. The person who does not believe God has made God a liar, by not believing the testimony God has given about his Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And this is that testimony: God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Whoever has the Son has life; whoever who doesn\uc1\u8217*t have God\uc1\u8217*s Son does not have life.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Final words

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I have written these things to you who believe in the name of God\uc1\u8217*s Son, so that you may know that you have eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}We can approach him with this confidence, that whenever we ask anything that is in accordance with his will, he listens to us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And if we know he hears us \uc1\u8211* whatever we ask \uc1\u8211* we know also that what we ask for is ours.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}If anyone sees one of our people committing some sin that is not a sin leading to death, they should ask, and God will give them life. I refer to those whose sin does not lead to death. There is a sin that leads to death. I am not saying that you should pray about that.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}All wrongdoing is sin, but there is sin that does not lead to death.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}We know that those who have been born of God do not keep sinning. God protects his children and the evil one cannot get hold of them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}We know that we are God\uc1\u8217*s children, though the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}We also know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know the true God \uc1\u8211* and we are in him who is true, by being in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}My children, guard yourselves against false ideas of God.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 2 John (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 John\uc1\u8217*s Second Letter

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Greetings

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From the elder, to the lady chosen by God and her children. I truly love you all, and I am not the only one but all who know the truth love you as well.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}We love you for the sake of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Grace, mercy, and peace will be ours \uc1\u8211* the gift of God, the Father, and of Jesus Christ, the Father\uc1\u8217*s Son \uc1\u8211* in truth and love.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Live in truth and love

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}It was a great joy to me to find the lives of some of your children guided by the truth, in obedience to the command that we received from the Father.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And now I implore you, dear lady, let us love one another This is not a new command I am writing to you. It is the command we have had from the beginning. \uc1\u8211* Let us love one another.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And this is love \uc1\u8211* to live in obedience to the Father\uc1\u8217*s commands. This is the command as you learned from the beginning, to live a life of love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}I say this because many deceivers have gone out into the world \uc1\u8211* men who do not acknowledge that Jesus Christ came in flesh and blood. Any such person is a deceiver and antichrist.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Take care so that you do not what we have worked for but instead receive your full reward.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Anyone who goes beyond and fails to live inside of the teaching of Christ does not have God. The person who lives inside that teaching \uc1\u8211* they have both the Father and the Son.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive them into your house or even welcome them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}because the person who welcomes them is sharing with them in his evil work.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Final words

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Though I have many other things to tell you, I would rather not use paper and ink. Instead I hope to come and see you, and to speak with you face to face, so that our joy may be complete.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The children of your sister, who is chosen by God, send you their greetings.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 3 John (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 John\uc1\u8217*s Third Letter

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Greetings

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}From the elder to his dear friend Gaius, whom he sincerely loves.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Dear friend, I pray that all may be well with you and that you may have good health \uc1\u8211* I know that all is well with your soul.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For it was a great joy to me, when some followers of the Lord came and testified to your fidelity to the truth. I know that your own life is guided by the truth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Nothing gives me greater pleasure than to hear from time to time that the lives of my children are guided by the truth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Gaius

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Dear friend, you are faithful in all the things you do for other followers \uc1\u8211* even when they are strangers to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}They themselves have testified before the church to your love. You will do well to help them on their way in a manner worthy of the service of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}For it was on behalf of Christ\uc1\u8217*s name that they set out, not accepting even one thing from the Gentiles.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Therefore, we should support people like them, and so take our share in their work for the truth.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Diotrephes and Demetrius

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I wrote something to the church, but Diotrephes (who loves to be the leader among them) doesn\uc1\u8217*t welcome us.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}So if I come, I will bring up his actions in telling wicked nonsense about us. Not content with that, he not only refuses to personally welcome our friends who are followers, but actually stops those who would, and expels them from the church.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Dear friend, do not follow a bad example, but a good one. The person who does what is good is from God; the person who does what is bad has never seen God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Everyone has always had a good word for Demetrius, and the truth itself speaks for him. Yes, and we also add our good word, and you know that what we say is true.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Final words

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I have many things to tell you, but I would rather not use pen and ink.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}I hope to see you soon, and then we will speak face to face.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Peace be with you. The friends here send you their greetings. Greet each one of our friends.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Jude (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs56 The Letter from

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 Jude

\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Introduction

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}To those who, having received the call, have been loved by God the Father and protected by Jesus Christ, From Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and the brother of James.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}May mercy, peace, and love be yours in ever increasing measure.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Warnings against moral corruption

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Dear friends, while I was making every effort to write to you about our common salvation, I felt that I must write to you at once to encourage you to fight in defence of the faith that has once for all been entrusted to the keeping of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}For there have crept in among you certain godless people, whose sentence has long since been pronounced, and who make the mercy of God an excuse for profligacy, and disown our only lord and master, Jesus Christ.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Now I want to remind you \uc1\u8211* but you already know it all \uc1\u8211* that, though the Lord delivered the people from Egypt, yet he afterwards destroyed those who refused to believe in him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and that even those angels, who did not keep to their appointed spheres, but left their proper homes, have been kept by him for the judgment of the great day in everlasting chains and black darkness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Like Sodom and Gomorrah and the towns near them, which gave themselves up to fornication, and fell into unnatural vice, these angels now stand out as a warning, undergoing, as they are, punishment in eternal fire.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Yet in the same way these people, too, cherishing vain dreams, pollute our human nature, reject control, and malign the celestial beings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Yet even Michael, the archangel, when, in his dispute with the devil, he was arguing about the body of Moses, did not venture to charge him with maligning, but said merely \uc1\u8220*The Lord rebuke you!\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}But these people malign whatever they do not understand; while they use such things as they know by instinct (like the animals that have no reason) for their own corruption.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Alas for them! They walk in the steps of Cain; led astray by Balaam\uc1\u8217*s love of gain, they plunge into sin, and meet their ruin through rebellion like Korah.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}These are the people who are blots on your \uc1\u8220*love-feasts,\uc1\u8221* when they feast together and provide without scruple for themselves alone. They are clouds without rain, driven before the winds; they are leafless trees without a vestige of fruit, dead through and through, torn up by the roots;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}they are wild sea waves, foaming with their own shame; they are \uc1\u8220*wandering stars,\uc1\u8221* for which the blackest darkness has been reserved for ever.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}To these people, as to others, Enoch, the seventh in descent from Adam, declared \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*See! The Lord has come with his hosts of holy ones around him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}to execute judgment on all people, and to convict all godless people of all their godless acts, which in their ungodliness they have committed, and of all the harsh words which they have spoken against him, godless sinners that they are!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}These people are always murmuring, and complaining of their lot; they follow where their passions lead them; they have arrogant words on their lips; and they flatter others for the sake of what they can get from them.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}But you should, dear friends, recall what was foretold by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}how they used to say to you \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*As time draws to an end, there will be scoffers, who will be led by their godless passions.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}These are the people \uc1\u8211* animal and unspiritual \uc1\u8211* who cause divisions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But you must, dear friends, build up your characters on the foundation of your most holy faith, pray under the guidance of the Holy Spirit,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and keep within the love of God, while waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to bring you to eternal life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}To some show pity, because they are in doubt. \uc1\u8220*Drag them out of the fire,\uc1\u8221* and save them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}To others show pity, but with caution, hating the clothing polluted by their touch.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Ascription

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}To him who is able to guard you from falling, and to bring you into his glorious presence, blameless and rejoicing \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}to the one God, our Saviour, be ascribed, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, glory, majesty, power, and dominion, as it was before time began, is now, and will be for all time to come. Amen.
\par}
\sectd\sect{\header \pard\qr\plain\f0\fs16 Revelation (Page \chpgn) \par}{\pard \pagebb
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs72 The Revelation to John
{\cf1\f1\fs22 1}The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him to make known to his servants, concerning what must shortly take place, and which he sent and revealed by his angel to his servant John,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}who testified to the message of God and to the testimony to Jesus Christ, omitting nothing of what he had seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Blessed is the one who reads, and blessed are they who listen to, the words of this prophecy, and lay to heart what is here written; for the time is near.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Messages to the Seven Churches

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}From John, to the seven churches which are in Roman Asia. Blessing and peace be yours from him who is, and who was, and who will be, and from the seven spirits that are before his throne,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the Ruler of all the kings of the earth. To him who loves us and freed us from our sins by his own blood \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and he made us a kingdom of priests in the service of God, his Father! \uc1\u8211* to him be ascribed glory and dominion for ever. Amen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}He is coming among the clouds! Every eye will see him, even those who pierced him and all the nations of the earth will mourn over him. So will it be. Amen.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8220*I am the Alpha and the Omega,\uc1\u8221* says the Lord, the God who is, and who was, and who will be, the Almighty.
\par}

{\pard 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I, John, who am your brother, and who share with you in the suffering and kingship and endurance of Jesus, found myself on the island called Patmos, for the sake of the message of God and the testimony to Jesus.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I fell into a trance on the Lord\uc1\u8217*s day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like the blast of a trumpet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}It said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Write what you see in a book and send it to the seven churches, to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}I turned to see what voice it was that spoke to me; and when I turned, I saw seven golden lamps,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}and in the midst of the lamps one like a man, in a robe reaching to his feet, and with a golden sash across his breast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The hair of his head was as white as wool, as white as snow; his eyes were like flaming fire;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and his feet were like brass as when molten in a furnace; his voice was like the sound of many streams,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}in his right hand he held seven stars, from his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword, and his face was like the sun in the fulness of its power.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And, when I saw him, I fell at his feet like one dead. He laid his hand on me and said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}the Everliving. I died, and I am alive for ever and ever. And I hold the keys of death and of Hades.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Therefore write of what you have seen and of what is happening now and of what is about to take place \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}the mystic meaning of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lamps. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lamps are the seven churches.
\par}

{\pard 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 2}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Ephesus write
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360These are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks among the seven golden lamps:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}I know your life, your toil and endurance, and I know that you cannot tolerate evildoers. I know, too, how you tested those who declare that they are apostles, though they are not, and how you proved them false.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}You possess endurance, and have borne much for my name, and have never grown weary.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}But this I have against you \uc1\u8211* You have abandoned your first love.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Therefore remember from what you have fallen, and repent, and live the life that you lived before; or else, I will come and remove your Lamp from its place, unless you repent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But this is in your favour \uc1\u8211* You hate the life lived by the Nikolaitans, and I also hate it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Anyone with ears should hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To him who conquers \uc1\u8211* to him I will give the right to eat the fruit of the Tree of life, which stands in the Paradise of God.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Smyrna write:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360 These are the words of him who is the First and the Last, who died, but is restored to life:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}I know your persecution and your poverty \uc1\u8211* yet you are rich! I know, too, the slander that comes from those who declare that they are God\uc1\u8217*s people, {\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   God\uc1\u8217*s people: Literally \uc1\u8220*Jews.\uc1\u8221* These people claimed to be God\uc1\u8217*s people because they were Jews. }though they are not, but are a congregation of Satan.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Do not be afraid of what you are about to suffer. The devil is about to throw some of you into prison so that you may be tempted, and may undergo persecution for ten days. Be faithful even to death, and I will give you the Crown of life.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. Those who conquer will suffer no hurt from the Second Death.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Pergamus write:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360 These are the words of him who holds the sharp two-edged sword:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I know where you live, where the throne of Satan stands. And yet you hold to my name, and you did not disown my faith even in the days of Antipas, my faithful witness, who was put to death among you where Satan dwells.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Yet I have a few things against you \uc1\u8211* You have among you those who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put temptations in the way of the Israelites, so that they should eat idol-offerings and commit licentious acts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Again you have among you those who hold in the same way to the teaching of the Nikolaitans.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Therefore repent, or else, I will come quickly and contend with such people with words that will cut like a sword.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To those who conquer \uc1\u8211* to them I will give a share of the mystic manna, and I will give them a white stone; and on the stone will be inscribed a new name, which no one knows except the person who receives it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Thyatira write:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360 These are the words of the Son of God, whose eyes are like flaming fire, and whose feet are like brass:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}I know your life, your love, faith, service, and endurance; and I know that your life of late has been better than it was at first.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Yet I have this against you \uc1\u8211* You tolerate the woman Jezebel, who declares that she is a prophet, and misleads my servants by her teaching, until they commit licentious acts and eat idol-offerings.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}I gave her time to repent, but she is determined not to turn from her licentiousness.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Therefore I am laying her on a bed of sickness, and bringing great suffering on those who are unfaithful with her, unless they repent and turn from a life like hers.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}I will also put her children to death; and all the churches will learn that I am he who looks into people\uc1\u8217*s hearts and souls; and I will give to each one of you what their life deserves.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}But I say to the rest of you at Thyatira \uc1\u8211* all who do not accept such teaching, whose who did not learn the secrets of Satan, as people call them \uc1\u8211* I am not laying on you any further burden;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}only hold fast to what you have received, until I come.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}To those who conquer and are careful to live my life to the end \uc1\u8211* to them I will give authority over the nations,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}and they will rule them with an iron rod, as when earthen vessels are broken in pieces (as I myself have received from my Father){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 28}and I will give them the morning star.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 29}Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 3}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Sardis write:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360 These are the words of him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars; \uc1\u8211* I know your life, and that people say of you that you are living, though you are dead.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Be on the watch, and strengthen what still survives, though once it was all but dead; for I have not found your life perfect in the eyes of my God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Therefore remember what you have received and heard, and lay it to heart and repent. Unless you are on the watch, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at what hour I am coming to you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Yet there are some few among you at Sardis who did not soil their robes; they will walk with me, robed in white, for they are worthy.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Those who conquer will be clothed in these white robes, and I will not strike their name out of the book of life; but I will own them before my Father, and before his angels.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360 These are the words of him who is holy and true, who holds the Key of David, who opens and no one will shut, and shuts and no one opens:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}I know your life (see, I have set a door open before you which no one is able to shut), I know that, though you have but little strength, you kept my teaching in mind, and did not disown my name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Listen, I give some of the congregation of Satan, the people who declare that they are God\uc1\u8217*s people, {\super\chftn}{\footnote\pard\plain\chftn   God\uc1\u8217*s people: Literally \uc1\u8220*Jews.\uc1\u8221* These people claimed to be God\uc1\u8217*s people because they were Jews. }though they are not, but are lying \uc1\u8211* I will make them come and bow down at your feet, and they will learn that I loved you.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Because you kept in mind the story of my endurance, I will keep you in the hour of trial that is about to come on the whole world, the hour that will test all who are living on earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}I will come quickly. Hold to what you have received so that no one may take your crown.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Those who conquer \uc1\u8211* I will make them a pillar in the Temple of my God; and never more will they leave it; and I will write on them the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the New Jerusalem, which is coming down out of heaven from my God, and I will write on them my new name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8216*To the angel of the church in Laodicea write:
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0\li360\fi360 These are the words of the Unchanging One, the witness faithful and true, the beginning of the Creation of God:{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}I know your life; I know that you are neither cold nor hot. If only you were either cold or hot!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But now, because you are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I am about to spit you out of my mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}You say \uc1\u8220*I am rich and have grown rich, and I want for nothing,\uc1\u8221* and you do not know that you are wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Therefore I counsel you to buy from me gold which has been refined by fire so that you may grow rich; and white robes, so that you may be clothed and your shameful nakedness be hidden; and ointment to anoint your eyes, so that you may see.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}All whom I love I rebuke and discipline. Therefore be in earnest and repent.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}I am standing at the door and knocking! If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will go in, and will feast with them, and they will feast with me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}To those who conquer \uc1\u8211* to them I will give the right to sit beside me on my throne, as I, when I conquered, took my seat beside my Father on his throne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The Vision of the Seven Seals

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 4}After this, in my vision, I saw an open door in the heavens, and the first voice that I heard was like the blast of a trumpet speaking to me. It said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come up here and I will show you what must take place.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Immediately after this I fell into a trance. There stood a throne in heaven, and on the throne was One seated.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He who was seated on it was in appearance like a jasper and a sardius; and round the throne there was a rainbow of the colour of an emerald.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And round the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and on these I saw twenty-four elders sitting clothed in white robes; and on their heads they had crowns of gold.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Out from the throne come flashes of lightning, cries, and peals of thunder! There are seven torches burning in front of the throne, which are the seven spirits of God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and in front of the throne is what seemed to be a sea of glass, resembling crystal, while within the space before the throne and round the throne are four creatures full of eyes in front and behind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The first creature is like a lion, the second creature like a calf, the third creature has a face like a man\uc1\u8217*s, and the fourth creature is like an eagle on the wing.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}These four creatures have each of them six wings, and all round, and within, they are full of eyes; and day and night they never cease to say \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Holy, holy, holy is the Lord, our God, the Almighty, who was, and who is, and who will be.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And, whenever these creatures give praise and honour and thanks to him who is seated on the throne, to him who lives for ever and ever,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}the twenty-four elders prostrate themselves before him who is seated on the throne, and worship him who lives for ever and ever, and throw down their crowns before the throne, saying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}\uc1\u8220*Worthy are you, our Lord and God, to receive all praise, and honour, and power, for you did create all things, and at your bidding they came into being and were created.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 5}Then I saw at the right hand of him who was seated on the throne a book, with writing inside and out, and sealed with seven seals;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and I saw a mighty angel who was proclaiming in a loud voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Who is worthy to open the book and break its seals?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}But no one either in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the book or look within it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}At this I wept long, because no one could be found who was worthy to open the book or look within it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}But one of the elders said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Do not weep. The Lion conquered \uc1\u8211* the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Scion of David \uc1\u8211* and can therefore open the book with its seven seals.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then, within the space between the throne and the four creatures, and in the midst of the elders, I saw, standing, a Lamb, which seemed to have been sacrificed. It had seven horns and seven eyes. (These eyes are the seven spirits of God, and they are sent into all the world.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The Lamb came forward; and he has taken the book from the right hand of him who was seated on the throne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And, when he had taken the book, the four creatures and the twenty-four elders prostrated themselves before the Lamb, each of them holding a harp and golden bowls full of incense. (These are the prayers of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}And they are singing a new song \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*You are worthy to take the book and break its seals, for you were sacrificed, and with your blood you did buy for God people of every tribe, and language, and people, and nation,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and did make them a kingdom of priests in the service of our God, and they are reigning on the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then, in my vision, I heard the voices of many angels round the throne, and of the creatures, and of the elders. In number they were ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of thousands,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}and they cried in a loud voice \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Worthy is the Lamb that was sacrificed to receive all power, and wealth, and wisdom, and might, and honour, and praise, and blessing.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And I heard every created thing in the air, and on the earth, and under the earth, and on the sea, and all that is in them crying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*To him who is seated on the throne and to the Lamb be ascribed all blessing, and honour, and praise, and dominion for ever and ever.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}And the four creatures said \uc1\u8220*Amen,\uc1\u8221* and the elders prostrated themselves and worshiped.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 6}Then I saw the Lamb break one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four creatures crying with a voice like thunder \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And in my vision I saw a white horse. Its rider held a bow, and he was given a crown, and he went out conquering and to conquer.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}When the Lamb broke the second seal, I heard the second creature crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then there went out another horse, a red horse, and to its rider was given the power to deprive the earth of peace, so that people should kill one another; and he was given a great sword.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When the Lamb broke the third seal, I heard the third creature crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come.\uc1\u8221* And in my vision I saw a black horse. Its rider held scales in his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And I heard what seemed to be a voice, coming from among the four creatures, crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*A quart of wheat for a silver coin, and three quarts of barley for a silver coin! But do not harm the oil and the wine.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When the Lamb broke the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth creature crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And in my vision I saw a grey horse. His rider\uc1\u8217*s name was Death, and Hades rode behind him; and power was given them over the fourth part of the earth, so that they might destroy with sword and famine and death, and by means of the wild Beasts of the earth.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}When the Lamb opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the sake of God\uc1\u8217*s message and for the testimony which they had borne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They cried in a loud voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*How long, Sovereign Lord, holy and true, before you will give judgment and avenge our blood on all who are living on the earth?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then to each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to rest yet a little longer, until the number of their fellow servants and of their friends in Christ\uc1\u8217*s service who were about to be put to death, as they had been, should be complete.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And I saw the Lamb break the sixth seal, and then there was a great earthquake. The sun became black, like sackcloth, and the moon, which was at its full, like blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The stars of the heavens fell to the earth, as when a fig tree, shaken by a strong wind, drops its unripe fruit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The heavens disappeared like a scroll when it is rolled up, and every mountain and island was moved from its place.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then all the kings of the earth, and the princes, and the generals, and the rich, and the powerful, and every slave and free person, hid themselves in the caves and under the rocks of the mountains;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and they are crying to the mountains and the rocks \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Fall on us, and hide us from the eyes of him who is seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for the great day of their wrath is come, and who can stand to meet it?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 7}After this, I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, restraining the four winds of the earth, so that no wind should blow over the earth, or over the sea, or against any tree.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And, in the east, I saw another angel, ascending, holding the seal of the living God; and he cried in a loud voice to the four angels, to whom there had been given power to harm the earth and the sea \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}\uc1\u8220*Do not harm the earth, or the sea, or the trees, until we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}I heard, too, the number of those who had been sealed. It was one hundred and forty-four thousand; and they were from every tribe of the Israelites.
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}From the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}from the tribe of Asher twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Napthali twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}from the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Levi twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}from the tribe of Zebulon twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand,
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 from the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed.
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}After this, in my vision, I saw a vast throng which no one could number, of people from every nation and of all tribes, and peoples, and languages. They stood in front of the throne and in front of the Lamb, robed in white, holding palm branches in their hands.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And they are crying in a loud voice \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Salvation be ascribed to our God who is seated on his throne and to the Lamb.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And all the angels were standing round the throne and the elders and the four creatures, and they prostrated themselves on their faces in front of the throne and worshiped God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}saying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Amen. Blessing and praise, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might be ascribed to our God for ever and ever. Amen.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 

\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then one of the elders turned to me and said \uc1\u8220*Who are these who are robed in white? And where did they come from?\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}\uc1\u8220*My Lord,\uc1\u8221* I answered, \uc1\u8220*it is you who know.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8220*These,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*are they who come through the Great Persecution; they washed their robes white in the blood of the Lamb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And therefore it is that they are before the throne of God, and are serving him day and night in his Temple; and he who is seated on the throne will shelter them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}Never again will they be hungry, never again will they be thirsty, nor will the sun smite them, nor any scorching heat;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}for the Lamb that stands in the space before the throne will be their shepherd, and will lead them to life-giving springs of water; and God will wipe away all tears from their eyes.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 8}As soon as the Lamb had broken the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for, it might be, half an hour.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of Seven Trumpet-Blasts

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Next, another angel came and stood at the altar with a golden censer in his hand; and a great quantity of incense was given to him, to mingle with the prayers of all Christ\uc1\u8217*s people on the golden altar before the throne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The smoke of the incense ascended, with the prayers of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, from the hand of the angel before God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire from the altar, and threw it down on the earth; and there followed peals of thunder, cries, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then the seven angels holding the seven trumpets prepared to blow their blasts.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}The first blew; and there came hail and fire mixed with blood, and it fell on the earth. A third part of the earth was burnt up, and a third of the trees, and every blade of grass.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the second angel blew; and what appeared to be a great mountain, burning, was hurled into the sea. A third of the sea became blood,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and a third part of all created things that are in the sea \uc1\u8211* that is, of all living things \uc1\u8211* died, and a third of the ships was destroyed.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the third angel blew; and there fell from the heavens a great star, burning like a torch. It fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}(The star is called \uc1\u8220*Wormwood.\uc1\u8221*) A third of the water became bitter as wormwood, and so bitter was the water that many died from drinking it.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the fourth angel blew; and a third of the sun and a third of the moon and a third of the stars were blasted, so that a third of them was eclipsed, and for a third part of the day there was no light, and at night it was the same.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And, in my vision, I heard an eagle flying in mid-heaven and crying in a loud voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Woe, woe, woe for all who live on the earth, at the other trumpet-blasts of the three angels who have yet to blow.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 9}Then the fifth angel blew; and I saw a star that had fallen on the earth from the heavens, and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He opened the bottomless pit, and from the pit rose a smoke like the smoke of a great furnace. The sun and the air grew dark because of the smoke from the pit.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Out of the smoke locusts descended on the earth, and they received the same power as that possessed by scorpions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}They were told not to harm the grass, or any plant, or any tree, but only those who have not the seal of God on their foreheads.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Yet they were not allowed to kill them, but it was ordered that those men should be tortured for five months. Their torture was like the torture caused by a scorpion when it stings a person.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}In those days people will seek Death and will not find it; They will long to die, but Death flees from them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}In appearance the locusts were like horses equipped for battle. On their heads there were what appeared to be crowns that shone like gold, their faces resembled human faces,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and they had hair like the hair of a woman, their teeth were like lions\uc1\u8217* teeth,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and they had what seemed to be iron breastplates, while the noise of their wings was like the noise of chariots drawn by many horses, galloping into battle.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They have tails like scorpions, and stings, and in their tails lies their power to harm people for five months.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}They have as their king the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name, in Hebrew, is \uc1\u8220*Abaddon,\uc1\u8221* while, in Greek, his name is \uc1\u8220*Apollyon\uc1\u8221* (the Destroyer).
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The first Woe has passed; and still there are two Woes to follow!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then the sixth angel blew; and I heard a voice proceeding from the corners of the golden altar that stood before God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}It spoke to the sixth angel \uc1\u8211* the angel with the trumpet \uc1\u8211* and said \uc1\u8220*Let loose the four angels that are in chains at the great river Euphrates.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the four angels, that were held in readiness for that hour and day and month and year, were let loose, to destroy a third of mankind.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The number of the hosts of cavalry was ten thousand times ten thousand, twice told; I heard their number.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}And this is what the horses and their riders appeared to be like in my vision: They had breastplates of fire, blood-red and sulphurous, and the heads of the horses were like lions\uc1\u8217* heads, while out of their mouths issue fire, and smoke, and sulphur.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Through these three curses a third of humanity perished \uc1\u8211* because of the fire, and the smoke, and the sulphur that issued from their mouths;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}for the power of the horses lies in their mouths and in their tails. For their tails are like snakes, with heads, and it is with them that they do harm.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}But those who were left of humanity, who had not perished through these curses, did not repent and turn away from what their own hands had made; they would not abandon the worship of demons, and of idols made of gold or silver or brass or stone or wood, which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}and they did not repent of their murders, or their sorceries, or their licentiousness, or their thefts.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 10}Then I saw another mighty angel, descending from heaven. His robe was a cloud; over his head was the rainbow; his face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}in his hand he held a little book open. He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the land;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}and he cried in a loud voice like the roaring of a lion. At his cry the seven peals of thunder spoke, each with its own voice.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}And, when they spoke, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven say \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Keep secret what the seven peals of thunder said, and do not write it down.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Then the angel, whom I had seen standing on the sea and on the land, raised his right hand to the heavens,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and swore by him who lives for ever and ever, who created the heavens and all that is in them, and the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it, that time should cease to be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Moreover at the time when the seventh angel will speak, when he is ready to blow his blast, then the hidden purposes of God, of which he told the good news to his servants, the prophets, are at once fulfilled.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then came the voice which I had heard from heaven. It spoke to me again, and said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Go and take the book that is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}So I went to the angel and asked him to give me the little book. And he said \uc1\u8220*Take it, and eat it. It will be bitter to your stomach, but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I took the little book out of the angel\uc1\u8217*s hand and ate it, and, while in my mouth, it was like the sweetest honey; but, when I had eaten it, it was bitter to my stomach.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And I was told \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*You must prophesy again about men of many peoples, and nations, and languages, and about many kings.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 11}Then I was given a measure like a rod, and a voice said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Go and measure the Temple of God and the altar, and count the worshiper there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}But omit the court outside the Temple, and do not measure that, for it has been given up to the nations; and the holy City will be under their heel for forty-two months.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then I will give permission to my Two Witnesses, and for those twelve hundred and sixty days they will continue teaching, clothed in sackcloth.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}These men are represented by the two olive trees and the two lamps that stand before the Lord of the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}When anyone wishes to harm them, fire comes from their mouths and consumes their enemies; and whoever wishes to harm them will, in this way, inevitably perish.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}These men have the power to close the heavens, so that no rain may fall during the time that they are teaching; and they have power to turn the streams into blood, and to smite the land with any curse, whenever they will.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}As soon as they have completed their testimony, the wild Beast that ascends from the bottomless pit will make war on them and conquer and kill them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Their dead bodies will lie in the streets of the great city, which is mystically spoken of as \uc1\u8220*Sodom\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*Egypt,\uc1\u8221* where their Master was crucified.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}People of all nations, and tribes, and languages, and races look at their dead bodies for three days and a half, and do not allow them to be laid in a grave.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Those who live on the earth rejoice over them and are merry, and they will send presents to one another, because these two prophets brought torments on those who live on the earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}After three days and a half the life-giving breath of God entered these men, and they stood up on their feet, and a great terror took possession of those who were watching them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The two men heard a loud voice from heaven which said to them \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Come up here,\uc1\u8221* and they went up to heaven in the cloud, while their enemies watched them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}At that very time a great earthquake occurred. A tenth part of the city fell, and seven thousand people perished in the earthquake. Those who escaped were much terrified, and praised the God of heaven.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The second Woe has passed; and there is a third Woe soon to follow!
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the seventh angel blew; and loud voices were heard in heaven saying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign for ever and ever.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}At this the twenty-four elders, who were seated on their thrones before God, prostrated themselves on their faces and worshiped him,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}saying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*We thank you, Lord, our God, the Almighty, who is and who was, that you have assumed your great power and reigned.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The nations were enraged, and your wrath fell on them; the time came for the dead to be judged, and for you to give the reward to your servants the prophets, and to the people of Christ, and to those who honour your name \uc1\u8211* the high and the low alike \uc1\u8211* and to destroy those who are destroying the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then the Temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark containing his covenant was seen in his Temple; and there followed flashes of lightning, cries, peals of thunder, an earthquake, and a great storm of hail.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of Seven Figures

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 12}Then a great portent was seen in the heavens \uc1\u8211* a woman whose robe was the sun, and who had the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}She was pregnant; and she is crying out in the pain and agony of childbirth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Another portent also was seen in the heavens There was a great red Dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads were seven diadems.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}His tail draws after it a third of the stars in the heavens, and it hurled them down on the earth. The Dragon is standing in front of the woman who is about to give birth to the child, so that he may devour it as soon as it is born.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The woman gave birth to a son, a male child, who is destined to rule all the nations with an iron rod; and her child was at once caught up to God on his throne.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}But the woman fled into the wilderness, where there is a place prepared for her by God, to be tended there for twelve hundred and sixty days.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Then a battle took place in the heavens. Michael and his angels fought with the Dragon. But though the Dragon, with his angels, fought,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}he did not prevail; and there was no place left for them any longer in the heavens.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then the great Dragon, the primeval snake, known as the \uc1\u8220*devil\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*Satan,\uc1\u8221* who deceives all the world, was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}And I heard a loud voice in heaven which said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Now has begun the day of the salvation, and Power, and Dominion of our God, and the Rule of his Christ; for the Accuser of our people has been hurled down, he who has been accusing them before our God day and night.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Their victory was due to the blood of the Lamb, and to the message to which they bore their testimony. In their love of life they shrank not from death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Therefore, be glad, heaven, and all who live in heaven! Alas for the earth and for the sea, for the devil has gone down to you in great fury, knowing that he has but little time.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}When the Dragon saw that he was hurled down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}But to the woman were given the two wings of the great eagle, so that she might fly to her place in the wilderness, where she is being tended for one year, and for two years, and for half a year in safety from the snake.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then the snake poured water from its mouth after the woman, like a river, so that it might sweep her away.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}But Earth came to her help, and opened her mouth and drank up the river which the Dragon had poured out of its mouth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}The Dragon was enraged at the woman, and went to fight with the rest of her offspring \uc1\u8211* those who lay to heart the commands of God and bear their testimony to Jesus;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and he took his stand on the sea-shore.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 13}Then I saw, rising out of the sea, a wild Beast with ten horns and seven heads. On its horns were ten diadems, and on its heads were blasphemous names.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The Beast that I saw was like a leopard; but its feet were like a bear\uc1\u8217*s, and its mouth like the mouth of a lion. The Dragon gave it his power and his throne, and wide dominion.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}One of its heads seemed to me to have been mortally wounded, but its deadly wound had been healed. The whole earth followed the Beast, wondering;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and men worshiped the Dragon, because he had given his dominion to the Beast; while, as they worshiped the Beast, they said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Who can compare with the Beast? And who can fight with it?\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}The Beast was given a mouth that spoke proudly and blasphemously, and it was empowered to work its will for forty-two months.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}It opened its mouth only to blaspheme God, to blaspheme his name and his tent \uc1\u8211* those who live in his tent in heaven.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}It had been permitted to fight with Christ\uc1\u8217*s people and to conquer them, and it had received power over men of every tribe, and people, and language, and nation.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}All who are living on earth will worship it \uc1\u8211* all whose names have not been written in the Lamb\uc1\u8217*s book of life, the Lamb that has been sacrificed from the foundation of the world.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Let those who have ears hear.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Whoever is destined for captivity goes into captivity. Whoever will kill with the sword must inevitably be killed with the sword. (Here there is need for endurance and faith on the part of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people.)
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then I saw, rising out of the earth, another wild Beast. It had two horns like those of a lamb, and its voice was like a dragon\uc1\u8217*s.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}It exercises all the authority of the first Beast under its eyes; and it makes the earth and all who are living on it worship that first Beast, whose mortal wound was healed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}It performs great marvels, even causing fire to fall from the heavens to the earth, before people\uc1\u8217*s eyes;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}and in consequence of the marvels which it was allowed to perform under the eyes of the Beast, it is able to deceive all who are living on the earth. It tells those who live on the earth to make a statue in honour of the Beast, who, despite the wound from the sword, yet lived.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}It was permitted to breathe life into the image of the Beast, so that the image of the Beast might speak; and it was also permitted to cause all who refused to worship the image of the Beast to be put to death.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}High and low, rich and poor, free and enslaved \uc1\u8211* it causes a brand to be put on the right hand or on the forehead of every one of them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}so that no one is able to buy or sell, except those that bear this brand \uc1\u8211* either the name of the Beast or the number indicated by the letters of his name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}(Here there is need for discernment.) The person with ability can compute the number of the Beast; for the number indicates a person\uc1\u8217*s name. Its number is six hundred and sixty-six.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 14}Then, in my vision, I saw the Lamb standing on Mount Zion. With him were a hundred and forty-four thousand, with his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And I heard a sound from heaven, like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of a loud peal of thunder; the sound that I heard was like the music of harpers playing on their harps.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They are singing what seems to be a new song, before the throne, and before the four creatures and the elders; and no one was able to learn that song except the hundred and forty-four thousand who had been redeemed from earth.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}These are the men who never defiled themselves in their intercourse with women; they are as pure as virgins. These are the men who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. They were redeemed as the first-fruits of mankind for God and for the Lamb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}No lie was ever heard on their lips. They are beyond reach of blame.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then I saw another angel, flying in mid-heaven. He had the good news, decreed from eternity, to announce to those who live on the earth \uc1\u8211* to men of every nation, and tribe, and language, and people;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and he cried in a loud voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Reverence God, and give him praise (for the hour of his judgment has come) and worship him who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all springs of water.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then a second angel followed, crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*She has fallen! She has fallen \uc1\u8211* Babylon the Great, who has made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her licentiousness!\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then a third angel followed them, crying in a loud voice \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Whoever worships the Beast and its image, and receives its brand on his forehead or on his hand,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}that person will drink the maddening wine of God that has been poured unmixed into the cup of his wrath, and they will be tortured with fire and sulphur before the eyes of the holy angels and before the eyes of the Lamb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}The smoke from their torture rises for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night \uc1\u8211* those who worship the Beast and its image, and all who are branded with its name.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}(Here there is need for endurance on the part of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people \uc1\u8211* those who lay to heart the commands of God and the faith of Jesus.){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}Then I heard a voice from heaven saying \uc1\u8220*Write: \uc1\u8216*Blessed are the dead who from this hour die in union with the Lord.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
 \uc1\u8216*Yes,\uc1\u8217* answers the Spirit, \uc1\u8216*that they may rest from their toil. Their good deeds go with them.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then, in my vision, I saw a white cloud, and on the cloud there was sitting one like a man. On his head he had a crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Then another angel came out from the Temple, crying in a loud voice to him who was sitting on the cloud \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Take your sickle and reap, for the time to reap has come; the Harvest of Earth is ready.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}He who was sitting on the cloud brought his sickle down on the earth, and the Harvest of Earth was reaped.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then another angel came out of the Temple in heaven; he, also, had a sharp sickle.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}Then another angel came out of the altar; he had power over fire, and he called in a loud voice to the angel that had the sharp sickle \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Take your sharp sickle, and gather the bunches from the vine of Earth, for its grapes are ripe.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The angel brought his sickle down on the earth and gathered the fruit of the vine of Earth, and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The grapes were trodden in the press outside the city; and blood came out of the press, rising as high as the bridles of the horses for a distance of two hundred miles.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Vision of Seven Curses

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 15}Then I saw another portent in the heavens \uc1\u8211* a great and marvellous portent \uc1\u8211* seven angels with the seven last curses; because with them the wrath of God is ended.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}Then I saw what appeared to be a sea of glass mixed with fire; and, standing by this sea of glass, holding the harps of God, I saw those who had come victorious out of the conflict with the Beast and its image and the number that formed its name.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}They are singing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Great and marvellous are your deeds, Lord, our God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, eternal King.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Who will not honour and praise your name, Lord? You alone are holy! All nations will come and worship before you, for your judgments have become manifest.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}After this I saw that the inmost shrine of the tent of testimony in heaven was opened,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}and out of it came the seven angels with the seven curses. They were adorned with precious stones, pure and bright, and had golden girdles round their breasts.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}One of the four creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls, filled with the wrath of God who lives for ever and ever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The Temple was filled with smoke from the glory and majesty of God; and no one could enter the Temple, until the seven curses inflicted by the seven angels were at an end.{\cf1\f1\fs22 16}Then I heard a loud voice, which came from the Temple, saying to the seven angels \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Go and empty the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}The first angel went and emptied his bowl on the earth; and it turned to loathsome and painful sores on all who bore the brand of the Beast and who worshiped its image.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Then the second angel emptied his bowl on the sea; and it turned to blood like the blood of a corpse, and every living thing died \uc1\u8211* everything in the sea.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the third angel emptied his bowl on the rivers and springs of water; and it turned to blood.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And I heard the angel of the Waters saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Righteous are you, you who is and who is, the Holy One, in inflicting this judgment;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}for men shed the blood of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people and of the prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. It is what they deserve.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}And I heard the response from the altar \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Yes, Lord, our God, the Almighty, true and righteous are they judgments.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Then the fourth angel emptied his bowl on the sun; and he was permitted to scorch men with fire;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}and men were scorched by the intense heat. They blasphemed the name of God who controlled these curses, yet they did not repent and give him praise.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the fifth angel emptied his bowl on the throne of the Beast; and darkness fell on its kingdom. Men gnawed their tongues for pain,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}and blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and because of their sores; yet they did not repent of what they had done.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}Then the sixth angel emptied his bowl on the great river Euphrates; and the water in the river was dried up, so that the road for the kings of the East might be made ready.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}And I saw three foul spirits, like frogs, come from the mouth of the Dragon and from the mouth of the Beast and from the mouth of the false prophet.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They are the spirits of demons, and perform marvels; they go to kings all over the world, to collect them for the battle on the great day of Almighty God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}(\uc1\u8220*I am coming like a thief! Happy will he be who is on the watch, and keeps his clothing at hand, so that he will not have to walk about unclothed and let men see his nakedness.\uc1\u8221*){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}And the spirits collected the kings at the place called in Hebrew \uc1\u8220*Har-Magedon.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then the seventh angel emptied his bowl on the air. (A loud voice came from the throne in the Temple; it said \uc1\u8220*All is over.\uc1\u8221*){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}There followed flashes of lightning, cries, and peals of thunder; and there was a great earthquake, such as had not occurred since man began to be on the earth \uc1\u8211* none so great;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and the great city was torn in three, and the cities of the nation fell, and God remembered Babylon the Great, and gave her the maddening wine-cup of his wrath;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}and every island vanished, and the mountains disappeared.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Great hailstones, a pound in weight, are falling on men from the heavens. And men blasphemed God because of the curse of the hail, for it was a very terrible curse.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Doom of the Enemies of Christ

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 17}Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls came and spoke to me. \uc1\u8220*Come here,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and I will show you the sentence passed on that Great Harlot who is seated at the meeting of many waters,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}and with whom all the kings of the earth have had licentious intercourse; while all who live on the earth have been make drunk by the wine of her licentiousness.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And he bore me away in a trance to a lonely place, and I saw a woman seated on a scarlet Beast, which was covered with blasphemous names; it had seven heads and ten horns.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold ornaments, precious stones, and pearls. In her hand she held a gold cup, full of idolatrous abominations, and the unclean fruits of her licentiousness;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}while on her forehead there was written this mystic name \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND OF ALL IDOLATROUS ABOMINATIONS ON EARTH.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people and with the blood of the martyrs for Jesus. When I saw her, I was amazed beyond measure;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}but the angel said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Why were you amazed? I will tell you the mystic meaning of the vision of this woman, and of the Beast, with the seven heads and ten horns, that carries her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}The Beast that you saw was, but is not, and is about to rise out of the bottomless pit, and is on its way to destruction. Those who are living on earth will be amazed \uc1\u8211* those whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world \uc1\u8211* when they see that the Beast was, but is not, and yet will come.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}(Here there is need for the discerning mind.) The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman is seated.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}They are also seven kings; of whom five have fallen and one remains, while one is not yet come. When he comes, he must stay for a little while.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}So must the Beast that was, but is not. He counts as an eighth king, although he is one of the seven, and is on his way to destruction.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}The ten horns that you saw are ten kings, who have not yet received their kingdoms, but for an hour they receive the authority of kings, together with the Beast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}These kings are of one mind in surrendering their power and authority to the Beast.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}They will fight with the Lamb, but the Lamb will conquer them, for he is Lord of lords and King of kings; so, too, will those with him who have received the call and are chosen and faithful.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And the angel said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*The waters that you saw, where the Harlot is seated, are throngs of people and men of all nations and languages.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The ten horns that you saw, and the Beast \uc1\u8211* they will hate the Harlot, and cause her to become deserted and strip her bare; they will eat her flesh and utterly consume her with fire.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}For God has put it into their minds to carry out his purpose, in carrying out their common purpose and surrendering their kingdoms to the Beast, until God\uc1\u8217*s decrees will be executed.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}As for the woman whom you saw, she is the great city that holds sway over all the kings of the earth.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 18}After this I saw another angel, descending from heaven, invested with great authority; and the earth was illuminated by his splendour.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}With a mighty voice he cried \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*She has fallen! She has fallen \uc1\u8211* Babylon the Great! She has become an abode of demons, a stronghold of every wicked spirit, a stronghold of every foul and hateful bird.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}For, after drinking the maddening wine of her licentiousness, all the nations have fallen; while all the kings of the earth have had licentious intercourse with her, and the merchants of the earth have grown rich through the excess of her luxury.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I heard another voice from heaven saying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Come out of her, my people, so that you may not participate in her sins, and that you may not suffer from the curses inflicted on her.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}For her sins are heaped up to the heavens, and God has not forgotten her misdeeds.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Pay her back the treatment with which she has treated you; yes, repay twice over what her actions deserve; in the cup which she mixed for you, mix for her as much again;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}for her self-glorification and her luxury, give her now an equal measure of torture and misery. In her heart she says \uc1\u8220*I sit here a queen; no widow am I; I will never know misery.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}Therefore in one day will these curses strike her \uc1\u8211* death, misery, and famine, and she will be utterly consumed by fire; for mighty is the Lord God who condemned her.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}All the kings of the earth who had licentious intercourse with her and shared her luxury will weep and lament over her, when they see the smoke from the burning city,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}while they stand at a distance, horrified at her torture, and cry \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Alas! Alas! Great city! Mighty city of Babylon! In a single hour your judgment fell.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}And the merchants of the earth weep and wail over her, because no longer does anyone buy their cargoes \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}their cargoes of gold, or silver, or precious stones, or pearls, or fine linen, or purple robes, or silk, or scarlet cloth; nor their many scented woods; nor their many articles of ivory; nor their many articles of choicest wood, or brass, or iron, or marble;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}nor their cinnamon, or spice, or incense, or perfumes, or frankincense, or wine, or oil, or fine flour, or wheat, or cattle, or sheep; nor their horses, or chariots, or slaves; nor the bodies and souls of people.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The fruit that your soul craved is no longer within your reach, and all dainties and luxuries are lost to you, never to be found again.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}The merchants who sold these things, and grew rich by her, will stand at a distance weeping and wailing, horrified at her torture, and crying \uc1\u8211*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8216*Alas! Alas! Great city! City clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet cloth! City adorned with gold ornaments, and precious stones, and pearls!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}In a single hour your vast wealth vanished.\uc1\u8217* Every ship\uc1\u8217*s captain and all who sail to any port, and sailors, and all who get their living from the sea, stood at a distance,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}and seeing the smoke from the burning city, cried \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*What city can compare with the Great city?\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}They threw dust on their heads, and, as they wept and wailed, they cried \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Alas! Alas! Great city! All who have ships on the sea grew rich through her magnificence. In a single hour it has vanished.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}Rejoice over her, heaven, and people of Christ, and apostles, and prophets, for God has avenged you on her!{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}Then a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and threw it into the sea, crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*So will Babylon, the great city, be violently overthrown, never more to be seen.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}No more will the music of harpers, or minstrels, or flute players, or trumpeters be heard in you, no more will any worker, skilled in any art, be found in you; no more will the sound of a mill be heard in you;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}no more will the light of a lamp shine in you; no more will the voices of groom and bride be heard in you. Your merchants were the great men of the earth, for all the nations were deceived by your magical charms.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}Yes, and in her was to be found the blood of the prophets and of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people, and of all who have been put to death on the earth.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 19}After this, I heard what seemed to be a great shout from a vast throng in heaven, crying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Hallelujah! To our God belong salvation, and glory, and Power,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}for true and righteous are his judgments. For he has passed judgment on the Great Harlot who was corrupting the earth by her licentiousness, and he has taken vengeance on her for the blood of his servants.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Again they cried \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Hallelujah!\uc1\u8221* And the smoke from her ruins rises for ever and ever.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then the twenty-four elders and the Four creatures prostrated themselves and worshiped God who was seated on the throne, crying \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Amen, Hallelujah!\uc1\u8221*;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}and from the throne there came a voice which said \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Praise our God all you who serve him, You who worship him, both high and low.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then I heard what seemed to be the shout of a vast throng, like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of loud peals of thunder, crying \uc1\u8211*
\par}

{\pard
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi-2440\li2800
 \uc1\u8220*Hallelujah! For the Lord is king, our God, the Almighty.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Let us rejoice and exalt; and we will pay him honour, for the hour for the Marriage of the Lamb has come, and his Bride has made herself ready.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}And to her it has been granted to robe herself in fine linen, white and pure, for that linen is the good deeds of the people of Christ.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi0 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then a voice said to me \uc1\u8220*Write \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Blessed are those who have been summoned to the marriage feast of the Lamb.\uc1\u8217*\uc1\u8221* And the voice said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*These words of God are true.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}I prostrated myself at the feet of him who spoke to worship him, but he said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*No! I am your fellow servant, and the fellow servant of your brothers and sisters who bear their testimony to Jesus. Worship God. For to bear testimony to Jesus needs the inspiration of the prophets.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then I saw that heaven lay open. There appears a white horse; its rider is called \uc1\u8220*Faithful\uc1\u8221* and \uc1\u8220*True\uc1\u8221*; righteously does he judge and make war.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}His eyes are flaming fires; on his head there are many diadems, and he bears a name, written, which no one knows but himself;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}he has been clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood; and the name by which he is called is \uc1\u8220*The Word of God.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The armies of heaven followed him, mounted on white horses and clothed in fine linen, white and pure.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}From his mouth comes a sharp sword, with which to smite the nations; and he will rule them with an iron rod. He treads the grapes in the press of the maddening wine of the wrath of Almighty God;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}and on his robe and on his thigh he has this name written \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then I saw an angel standing on the sun. He cried in a loud voice to all the birds that fly in mid-heaven \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Gather and come to the great feast of God,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}to eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of commanders, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all free and enslaved, and of high and low.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}Then I saw the Beast and the kings of the earth and their armies, gathered together to fight with him who sat on the horse and with his army.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}The Beast was captured, and with him was taken the false prophet, who performed the marvels before the eyes of the Beast, with which he deceived those who had received the brand of the Beast and those who worshiped his image. Alive, they were thrown, both of them, into the lake of fire \uc1\u8211* of burning sulphur.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The rest were killed by the sword which came out of the mouth of him who rode on the horse; and all the birds fed on their flesh.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 20}Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, with the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}He seized the Dragon, the primeval snake (who is the \uc1\u8220*devil\uc1\u8221* or \uc1\u8220*Satan\uc1\u8221*), and bound him in chains for a thousand years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}He flung him into the bottomless pit and locked it, and set his seal on it; that he should not deceive the nations any more, until the thousand years were ended. After that he must be let loose for a while.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}Then I saw thrones, and to those who took their seats on them authority was given to act as judges. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony to Jesus and because of the message of God, for they had refused to worship the Beast or its image, and had not received the brand on their foreheads and on their hands. They were restored to life, and they reigned with the Christ for a thousand years.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}(The rest of the dead were not restored to life until the thousand years were ended.) This is the first resurrection.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Blessed and holy will he be who shares in that first resurrection. The second Death has no power over them; but they will be priests of God, and the Christ, and they will reign with him for the thousand years.
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}When the thousand years are ended, Satan will be let loose from his prison,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}and he will come out to deceive the nations that live in the four corners of the earth \uc1\u8211* Gog and Magog. He will come to gather them together for battle; and their number will be as great as the sand on the sea-shore.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}They went up over the breadth of the whole earth, and surrounded the camp of Christ\uc1\u8217*s people and the city that he loves. Then fire fell from the heavens and consumed them;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}and the devil, their deceiver, was hurled into the lake of fire and sulphur, where the Beast and the false prophet already were, and they will be tortured day and night for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Then I saw a great white throne, and him who was seated on it. The earth and the heavens fled from his presence; no place was left for them.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}And I saw the dead, high and low, standing before the throne; and books were opened. Then another book was opened, the book of life; and the dead were judged, according to their actions, by what was written in the books.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}The sea gave up its dead, and Death and Hades gave up their dead; and they were judged, one by one, each according to his actions.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Then Death and Hades were hurled into the lake of fire. This is the Second Death \uc1\u8211* the lake of fire;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}and all whose names were not found written in the book of life were hurled into the lake of fire.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 The New Creation

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\cf1\f1\fs22 21}Then I saw new heavens and a new earth. The former heavens and the former earth had passed away; and the sea has ceased to be.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}And I saw the Holy City, Jerusalem, descending new out of heaven from God, like a bride adorned in readiness for her husband.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}And I heard a loud voice from the throne, which said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*See! The tent of God is set up among people. God will live among them, and they will be his Peoples, and God himself will be among them,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}and he will wipe away all tears from their eyes. There will be no more death, nor will there be any more grief or crying or pain. The old order has passed away.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}And he who was seated on the throne said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*See, I make all things new!\uc1\u8221* And he said \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Write this, for these words may be trusted and are true.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}And he said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*They are fulfilled. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the End. To those who thirst I will give of the spring of the water of life, freely.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}Those who conquer will enter into possession of these things, and I will be their God, and they will be my children.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}But as for cowards, unbelievers, the degraded, murderers, the impure, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars \uc1\u8211* their place will be in the burning lake of fire and sulphur. That is the Second Death.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls, and were laden with the seven last curses, came and spoke to me. \uc1\u8220*Come here,\uc1\u8221* he said, \uc1\u8220*and I will show you the Bride, the Wife of the Lamb.\uc1\u8221*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}He carried me away in a trance to a great high mountain, and showed me Jerusalem, the Holy City, descending out of heaven from God, filled with the glory of God.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Its brilliance was like a precious stone, like a jasper, transparent as crystal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}It had a great high wall, in which were twelve gates; and at these gates there were twelve angels, and there were names inscribed on the gates, the names of the twelve tribes of the Israelites.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}There were three gates on the east, three gates on the north, three gates on the south, and three gates on the west.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}The wall of the city had twelve foundation stones, on which were the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}And the angel who was speaking to me had as a measure a gold rod, with which to measure the city and its gates and its wall.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}The city is square; the length and the breadth are the same. The angel measured with his rod; it was twelve hundred miles; its length, and breadth, and height are equal.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}Then he measured the wall; it was two hundred and eighty-eight feet, as people measure, that is as the angel measured.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}The material of the wall of the city was jasper, and the city was built of pure gold, which shone like clear glass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}The foundations of the wall of the city were ornamented with every kind of precious stone. The first foundation stone was a jasper; the second a sapphire; the third a chalcedony; the fourth an emerald;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}the fifth a sardonyx; the sixth a carnelian; the seventh a chrysolite; the eighth a beryl; the ninth a topaz; the tenth a chrysoprase; the eleventh a hyacinth; and the twelfth an amethyst.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}The twelve gates were made of twelve pearls, each gate of one pearl. The street of the city was of pure gold, transparent as glass.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 22}And I saw no Temple there, for the Lord, our God, the Almighty, and the Lamb are its Temple.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 23}The city has no need of the sun or the moon to shine on it, for the glory of God illuminated it, and its Lamp was the Lamb.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 24}The nations walk by the light of it; and the kings of the earth bring their glory into it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 25}Its gates will never be shut by day, and there will be no night there.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 26}And people will bring the glory and honour of the nations into it.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 27}Never will any unhallowed thing enter it, nor they whose life is shameful and false, but only those whose names have been written in the Lamb\uc1\u8217*s book of life.{\cf1\f1\fs22 22}And the angel showed me a river of the water of life, as clear as crystal, issuing from the throne of God and of the Lamb,{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 2}in the middle of the street of the city. On each side of the river was a Tree of life which bore twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 3}Every thing that is accursed will cease to be. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be within it, and his servants will worship him;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 4}they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 5}Night will cease to be. They have no need of the light of a lamp, nor have they the light of the sun; for the Lord God will be their light, and they will reign for ever and ever.
\par}

{\pard\sb360\sa360\fs32 Conclusion

\par}

{\pard
\par}
{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 6}Then the angel said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*These words may be trusted and are true. The Lord, the God that inspires the prophets, sent his angel to show his servants what must quickly take place;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 7}and they said \uc1\u8220*I will come quickly.\uc1\u8221* Blessed will he be who lays to heart the words of the prophecy contained in this book.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 8}It was I, John, who heard and saw these things; and, when I heard and saw them, I prostrated myself in worship at the feet of the angel that showed them to me.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 9}But he said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Forbear; I am your fellow servant, and the fellow servant of your fellow prophets, and of all who lay to heart the words in this book. Worship God.\uc1\u8217*
\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 10}Then the angel said to me \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8216*Do not keep secret the words of the prophecy contained in this book; for the time is near.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 11}Let the wrongdoer continue to do wrong; the filthy-minded continue to be filthy; the righteous continue to act righteously; and the holy-minded continue to be holy.\uc1\u8217*{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 12}(\uc1\u8220*I will come quickly. I bring my rewards with me, to give to each what their actions deserve.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 13}I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the beginning and the End.\uc1\u8221*){\super\f1\cf2\fs24 14}Blessed will they be who wash their robes! They will have the right to approach the Tree of life, and may enter the city by the gates.{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 15}Outside will be the filthy, the sorcerers, the impure, the murderers, the idolaters, and all who love the false and live it.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 16}\uc1\u8220*I, Jesus, sent my angel to bear testimony to you about these things before the churches. I am the Scion and the Offspring of David, the bright star of the Morning.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 17}\uc1\u8220*Come,\uc1\u8221* say the Spirit and the Bride; and all who hear, say \uc1\u8220*Come.\uc1\u8221* All who thirst, come; anyone who wants, take the water of life freely.
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 18}I declare to all who hear the words of the prophecy contained in this book \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*If anyone adds to it, God will add to his troubles the curses described in this book;{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 19}and if anyone takes away any of the words in the book containing this prophecy, God will take away his share in the Tree of life, and in the Holy City \uc1\u8211* as described in this book.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 20}He whose testimony this is says \uc1\u8211* \uc1\u8220*Assuredly I will come quickly.\uc1\u8221* \uc1\u8220*Amen, come, Lord Jesus.\uc1\u8221*
\par}

{\pard 

\par}

{\pard\sl280\slmult1\fs24\fi360 
{\super\f1\cf2\fs24 21}May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ, be with his people.
\par}

}